---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: V. The Pontifical Confutation
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 05
---

#### 36. Papal Party Refusing Conciliation.

At the Diet of Augsburg, convened in order to restore the disturbed
religious peace, the Lutherans were the first to take a step towards
reconciliation by delivering their Confession, June 25, 1530. In
accordance with the manifesto of Emperor Charles, they now expected
that the papal party would also present its "view and opinion," in
order that the disuccsions might thereupon proceed "in love and
kindness," as the Emperor put it. In the Preface to their Confession
the Lutherans declared: "In obedience to Your Imperial Majesty's
wishes, we offer, in this matter of religion, the Confession of our
preachers and of ourselves, showing what manner of doctrine from the
Holy Scriptures and the pure Word of God has been up to this time set
forth in our lands, dukedoms, dominions, and cities, and taught in our
churches. And if the other Electors, Princes, and Estates of the
Empire will, according to the said imperial proposition, presentc
similar writings, to wit, in Latin and German giving their opinions in
this matter of religion, we, with the Princes'and friends aforesaid,
here before Your Imperial Majesty, our most clement Lord, are prepared
to confer amicably concerning all possible ways and means, in order
that we may come together, as far as this may be honorably done, and,
the matter between us on both sides being peacefully discussed without
offensive strife, the dissension, by God's help, may be done away and
brought back to one true accordant religion; for as we all are under
one Christ and do battle under Him, we ought to confess the one Christ,
after the tenor of Your Imperial Majesty's edict, and everything ought
to be conducted according to the truth of God; and this is what, with
most fervent prayers, we entreat of God." (39, S.)

The Lutherans did not believe that the manifesto of the Emperor could
be construed in any other way than that both parties would be treated
as equals at the Diet. Not merely as a matter of good policy, but
_bona fide_, as honest Germans and true Christians, they clung
tenaciously to the words of the Emperor, according to which the
Romanists, too, were to be regarded as a party summoned for the trial,
the Emperor being the judge. The Lutherans simply refused to take the
word of the Emperor at anything less than par, or to doubt his good
will and the sincerity of his promise. The fact that from the very
beginning his actions were in apparent contravention of the manifesto
was attributed by the Lutherans to the sinister influence of such
bitter, baiting, and unscrupulous theologians as Eck, Cochlaeus, and
Faber, who, they claimed, endeavored to poison and incite the
guileless heart of the Emperor. Thus the Lutherans would not and could
not believe that Charles had deceived them, a simple trust, which,
however, stubborn facts finally compelled them to abandon.

The Romanists, on the other hand, boasting before the Emperor that
they had remained with the true Christian faith, the holv Gospel, the
Catholic Church, the bull of the Pope, and the Edict of Worms, refused
with equal tenacity to be treated as a party summoned for trial. June
25, 1530, Elector John wrote to Luther: "Thus we and the other princes
and estates who are related to us in this matter had to consent to
submit our opinion and confession of faith. Our opponents, however, as
we are told, declined to present theirs and decided to show to the
Emperor that they adhered to the Edict [of Worms] and to the faith
which their fathers had bequeathed to and bestowed upon them, and
which they intended to adhere to even now; if, however, the Pope or,
in his place, the Legate, together with His Imperial Majesty, would
point out, and expect them to adopt, a different and new faith, they
would humbly hear the Emperor's opinion." (Luther, St. L. 16, 758.)

Thus presupposing what they were summoned to prove at Augsburg,
namely, that the doctrine of the Pope was identical with the old
Christian faith, the Romanists declared a presentation of their views
unnecessary. The Lutherans, they maintained, were convicted apostates
and rebels against Pope and Church, against Emperor and realm;
sentence was not first to be pronounced upon them, but had been
pronounced long ago, the Diet's duty merely being to confirm and
execute it; hence, there was nothing else to be done by the Emperor
than to attend to his office as warden and protector of the Church,
and, together with the princes and estates, to proceed against the
heretics with drastic measures. Also in the later discussions,
conducted with a view of effecting a reconciliation, the Romanists
refused to relinquish this position. From beginning to end they acted
as the accusers, judges, and henchmen of the Lutherans. Nor was
anything else to be expected, since, unlike the Lutherans, they
considered not God's Word, but the Pope the supreme arbiter in
religious matters. Thus, from the very outset, the gulf between the
two parties was such that it could not be bridged. Common ground was
lacking. On the one side conscience, bound by the Word of God! On the
other, blind subjection to human, papal authority! Also Romanists
realized that this fundamental and irreconcilable difference was bound
to render futile all discussions. It was not merely his own disgust
which the papal historian expressed when he concluded his report on
the prolonged discussions at Augsburg: "Thus the time was wasted with
vain discussions." (Plitt, _Apologie_, 43.)

#### 37. Further Success Not Hoped for by Luther.

Luther regarded the public reading of the Confession as an
unparalleled triumph of his cause. Further results, such as a union
with the Romanists, he did not expect. On July 9, 1530, he wrote to
Jonas: "_Quid sperem de Caesare, quantumvis optimo, sed obsesso?_ What
can I hope of the Emperor, even the best, when he is obsessed" [by the
papal theologians]? The most Luther hoped for was mutual political
toleration. In the letter quoted he continues: "But they [the Papists]
must expect a sad, and we a happy issue. Not, indeed, that there ever
will be unity of doctrine; for who can hope that Belial will be united
with Christ? Excepting that perhaps marriage [of priests] and the two
kinds [of the Sacrament] be permitted (here too, however, this adverb
'perhaps' is required, and perhaps too much 'perhaps'). But this I
wish and earnestly hope for, that, the difference in doctrine being
set aside, a political union may be made. If by the blessing of Christ
this takes place, enough and more than enough has been done and
accomplished at this Diet. . . . Now, if we obtain also the third
thing, that we adjourn with worldly peace secured, then we shall have
clearly defeated Satan in this year." (Enders, 8, 95; St. L. 16, 927.
1666.)

July 21, 1530, Luther wrote in a similar vein to Jonas: "The fact
that these frogs [the papal theologians who wrote the Confutation]
with their croakings [_coaxitatibus_ = pasquinades against Luther,
instead of answers to the Augustana] have free access [to the Emperor]
chagrins me very much in this great work in the most important
matters. . . . But this happens to prove that I am - a true prophet;
for I have always said that we work and hope in vain for a union in
doctrine; it would be enough if we could obtain worldly peace."
(16,927. 2324.) August 25, when the prolonged discussions of
reconciliation were nearing their end, he wrote to Melanchthon: "In
sum, it does not please me at all that unity of doctrine is to be
discussed, since this is utterly impossible, unless the Pope would
abolish his entire popery. It would have sufficed if we had presented
to them the reasons for our faith and desired peace. But how can we
hope that we shall win them over to accept the truth? We have come to
hear whether they approve our doctrine or not, permitting them to
remain what they are, only inquiring whether they acknowledge our
doctrine to be correct or condemn it. If they condemn it, what does it
avail to discuss the question of unity any longer with avowed enemies?
If they acknowledge it to be right, what necessity is there of
retaining the old abuses?" (16, 1404.)

Though willing to yield to the Catholic party in all other matters,
Luther refused to compromise the divine truth in any point or in any
way. For this reason he also insisted that the Emperor should not be
recognized as judge and arbiter without qualification, but only with
the proviso that his decision would not conflict with the clear Word
of God. According to Luther, everybody, Pope and Emperor included,
must submit to the authority of the Scriptures. In a letter of July 9,
1530, he wrote to the Elector: "In the first place: Should His
Imperial Majesty desire that the Imperial Majesty be permitt@d to
decide these matters, since it was not His Majesty's purpose to enter
into lengthy discussions, I think Your Electoral Grace might answer
that His Imperial Majesty's manifesto promises that he would
graciously listen to these matters. If such was not intended, the
manifesto would have been needless, for His Imperial Majesty might
have rendered his decision just as well in Spain without summoning
Your Electoral Grace to Augsburg at such great labor and expense. . . .
In the second place: Should His Imperial Majesty insist that the
Imperial Majesty be permitted to decide these matters, Your Electoral
Grace may cheerfully answer: Yes, the Imperial Majesiy shall decide
these matters, and Your Electoral Grace would accept and suffer
everything, provided only that His Imperial Majesty make no decision
against the clear Scriptures, or God's Word. For Your Electoral Grace
cannot put the Emperor above God, nor accept his verdict in
opposition to God's Word." (16,815.)

#### 38. Papal Peace Sought by Emperor.

By their obstinate refusal to regard themselves as a party summoned,
the Romanists, from the outset, made it impossible for the Emperor to
maintain the role of an impartial judge, which, probably, he had never
really intended to be. At an rate, though earnestly desirous of
religious peace, his actions throughout the Diet do not reveal a
single serious effort at redeeming his promise and putting his
beautiful words into practise. Being bound to the Pope and the papal
party both religiously and politically, Charles did not require of the
Romanists a fulfilment of the obligations imposed upon them by his
manifesto. All the concessions were to be made by the Lutherans.
_Revoca!_ - that was the first and only word which Rome had hitherto
spoken to Luther. "Revoke and submit yourselves!" - that, in the last
analysis, was also the demand of the Emperor at Augsburg with respect
to the Lutheran princes, both when he spoke in tones friendly and
gentle and when he uttered severe and threatening words. Charles, it
is true, desired peace, but a Roman peace, a peace effected by
universal blind submission to the Pope; not a peace by mutual
understanding and concessions; least of all a peace by political
religious tolerance, such as Luther desired, and which in our days is
generally regarded as the outstanding feature of modern civilization,
notably of Americanism. To force the Lutherans into submission and
obedience to the Pope, that was the real object of the Emperor. And
the political situation demanded that this be accomplished by
peaceable and gentle means - if possible.

Self-evidently, in his endeavors to establish a Papal Peace, the
Emperor, who was haunted and tormented by the fear that all efforts
might prove futile, was zealously seconded, encouraged, and prodded on
by the papal theologians. To bring about a religious peace, such as
the Emperor contemplated, this, they flattered Charles, would be an
ever-memorable achievement, truly worthy of the Emperor, for the eyes
of all Christendom were upon him, and he had staked his honor upon the
success of this glorious undertaking. June 3 the Father Confessor of
the Emperor, Garsia, then at Rome, wrote to Charles: "At present there
is nothing so important in this life as that Your Maesty emerge
victorious in the German affair. In Italy you will be accounted the
best prince on earth if God should vouchsafe this grace unto us that
the heresies which have arisen in that nation be cured by your hand."
(Plitt, 4.) June 6 Garsia wrote: "Gracious Lord! After the letters
from the legate [Campegius, concerning the return of Christian II to
the Roman Church, the disagreement between Philip of Hesse and the
Elector, etc.] had been read at to-day's Consistorial Meeting, almost
all the cardinals said that Your Majesty was the angel sent from
heaven to restore Christendom. God knows how much I rejoiced, and
although the sun burned fiercely when I returned to mv home, how
patiently I bore it! I was not sensitive to it from sheer joy at
hearing such sweet words about my master from those who a year ago had
maligned him. My chief comfort, however, was to behold that they were
right; for it seems as if God were performing miracles by Your Majesty,
and to judge by the beginning you have made in curing this ailment, it
is evident that we may expect the issue to prove far more favorable
than our sins merit." (11. 67.)

#### 39. Compulsion Advocated by Theologians.

All Romanists, the Emperor included, were of the opinion that the
Protestants must be brought back to the papal fold. But they differed
somewhat as to the means of accomplishing this purpose. Some demanded
that force be resorted to forthwith, while others counseled that
leniency be tried first, Campegius advised kindness at the beginning,
and greater severity only in dealing with certain individuals, but
that sharper measures and, finally, force of arms ought to follow. At
Rome force was viewed as the "true rhubarb" for healing the breach,
especially among the common people. July 18 Garsia wrote to the
Emperor: "If you are determined to bring Germany back to the fold, I
know of no other or better means than by presents and flattery to
persuade those who are most eminent in science or in the empire to
return to our faith. Once that is done, you must, in dealing with the
remaining common people, first of all publish your imperial edicts and
Christian admonitions. If they will not obey these, then the true
rhubarb to cure them is force. This alone cured Spain's rebellion
against its king. And force is what will also cure Germany's
unfaithfulness to God, unless, indeed, divine grace should not attend
Your Majesty in the usual measure. God would learn in this matter
whether you are a faithful son of His, and should He so find, then I
promise you that among all creatures you will find no power
sufficiently strong to resist you. All will but serve the purpose of
enabling you to obtain the crown of this world." (42.)

Among the open advocates of force were Cochlaeus, Eck, Faber, and the
theologians and monks who flocked to Augsburg in large numbers about
the time the Augsburg Confession was read. They all considered it
their prime duty to rouse the passions of the Emperor, as well as of
the Catholic princes and estates, and to incite them against the
Lutherans. Their enmity was primarily directed against the Augustana,
whose objective and moderate tone had gained many friends even among
the Catholics, and which had indirectly branded Eck and his compeers
as detractors and calumniators. For had not Duke William of Bavaria,
after the reading of the Confession, rebuked Eck, in the presence of
the Elector of Saxony, for having misrepresented the Lutheran doctrine
to him? The moderation of the Augustana, said these Romanists, was
nothing but the cunning of serpents, deception and misrepresentation,
especially on the part of the wily Melanchthon; for the true Luther
was portrayed in the 404 theses of Eck. Cochlaeus wrote that the
Lutherans were slyly hiding their ungodly doctrines in order to
deceive the Emperor: "astute occultari in illorum Confessione prava
eorum dogmata, de quibus ibi tacendo dissimulabant, ut in hypocrisi
loquentes Maiestati Tuae aliisque principibus imponerent." (Laemmer,
_Vortridentinische Theologie_, 39.) Thus the malice and fanaticism of
the papal theologians and the monks rose in proportion as friendliness
was shown the Lutherans by Catholic princes and the Emperor. They
feared that every approach toward the Lutherans would jeopardize the
pax Pontif&cia.

The fanaticism of the papal theologians is frequently referred to by
the Lutherans. June 26 Melanchthon wrote to Luther: "Sophists and
monks are daily streaming into the city, in order to inflame the
hatred of the Emperor against us." (_C.R._ 2, 141.) June 27: "Our
Confession was presented last Saturday. The opponents are now
deliberating upon how to answer; they flock together, take great pains,
and incite the princes, who already have been sufficiently aroused.
Eck vehementiy demands of the Archbishop of Mainz that the matter be
not debated, since it has already been condemned." (144.) June 29
Jonas wrote to Luther: "Faber is goaded on by furies, and Eck is not a
whit more sensible. Both insist in every manner imaginable that the
affair ought to be managed by force and must not be heard." (154.)
Melanchthon, July 8: "By chance Eck and Cochlaeus came to the legate
[Campegius, with whom Melanchthon was deliberating]. I heard them say,
distinctly enough, I believe, that the opponents are merely
deliberating upon how to suppress us by force." (175.) July 15:
"Repeatedly have I been with certain enemies who belong to that herd
of Eck. Words fail me to describe the bitter, Pharisaical hatred I
noticed there. They do nothing, they plan nothing else than how they
may incite the princes against us, and supply the Emperor with impious
weapons." (197.) The implacable theologians also succeeded in
fanaticizing some of the princes and bishops, who gradually became
more and more opposed to any kind of settlement by mutual
understanding. (175.)

The chief exponent of force was Cochlaeus. In his _Expostulatio_,
which appeared at Augsburg in May, 1530, he argued that not only
according to papal, but according to imperial law as well, which the
Evangelicals also acknowledged, and according to the Scriptures,
heretics might, aye, must be punished with death. The treatise
concludes as follows: "Thus it is established that obdurate heretics
may be executed by every form of law. We, however, much prefer to have
them return to the Church, be converted, healed, and live, and we
beseech them to do so. _Constat igitvr, haereticos pertinaces omni
iure interimi posse. Nos tamen longe magis optamus et precamur, ut
redeuntes ad ecclesiam convertantur, sanentur et vivant." (Plitt,
1, 5.)

Naturally Eck, too, was prominent among those who counseled the
employment of compulsory measures; indeed, he could not await the hour
when the order would be given to proceed against the heretics with
fire and sword. He lamented, in bitter terms, the fact that the
Emperor had not made use of stern measures as soon as he arrived in
Germany. For now, said he, procrastination and the conciliatory
demeanor of the Evangelicals, especially of Melanchthon and Brueck,
had made it impossible to rouse the Emperor to such a degree as the
exigency of the case demanded. (Plitt, 63.) Luther wrote: "For that
shameless gab and bloodthirsty sophist, Doctor Eck, one of their chief
advisers, publicly declared in the presence of our people that if the
Emperor had followed the resolution made at Bononia, and, immediately
on entering Germany, had courageously attacked the Lutherans with the
sword, and beheaded one after another, the matter would have been
easily settled. But all this was prevented when he permitted the
Elector of Saxony to speak and be heard through his chancellor."
(St.L. 16, 1636.)

#### 40. Emperor Employs Mildness.

While a number of the Catholic estates, incited by the theologians,
were also in favor of immediately resorting to brutal force, the
Emperor, for political reasons, considered it more advisable to employ
kindness. Lauding the extreme affability and leniency of Charles,
Melanchthon wrote to Luther, January 25: "The Emperor greets our
Prince very kindly; and I would that our people, in turn, were more
complaisant towards him. I would ask you to admonish our Junior Prince
by letter in this matter. The Emperor's court has no one milder than
himself. All others harbor a most cruel hatred against us. _Caesar
satis benigne salutat nostrum principem; ac velim vicissim nostros
erga ipsum officiosiores esse. Ea de re utinam iuniorem principem
nostrum litteris admonueris. Nihil ipso Caesare mitiiis habet ipsius
aula. Reliqui omnes crudelissime nos oderunt." (_C.R._ 2, 125.)

The reading of the Augustana strengthened this friendly attitude of
Charles. Both its content and its conciliatory tone, which was not at
all in harmony with the picture of the Lutherans as sketched by Eck,
caused him to be more kindly disposed toward Protestantism, and
nourished his hope that religious peace might be attained by peaceable
means. Other Catholic dignitaries and princes had been impressed in
the same manner. July 6 Luther wrote to Hausmann: "Many bishops are
inclined to peace and despise the sophists, Eck and Faber. One bishop
[Stadion of Augsburg] is said to have declared in a private
conversation, 'This [the Confession of the Lutherans] is the pure
truth, we cannot deny it.' The Bishop of Mainz is being praised very
much for his endeavors in the interest of peace. Likewise Duke Henry
of Brunswick, who extended a friendly invitation to Philip to dine
with him, and admitted that he was not able to disprove the articles
treating of both kinds, the marriage of priests, and the distinction
of meats. Our men boast that, of the entire Diet, no one is milder
than the Emperor himself. Such is the beginning. The Emperor treats
our Elector not only graciously, but most respectfully. So Philip
writes. It is remarkable how all are aglow with love and good will
toward the Emperor. It may happen, if God so wills, that, as the first
Emperor (Charles at Worms] was very hostile, so this last Emperor
[Charles at Augsburg] will be very friendly. Only let us pray; for the
power of prayer is clearly perceived." (St.L. 16, 882.) The Emperor's
optimism was, no doubt, due to the fact that, unlike his theologians,
he did not perceive and realize the impassable gulf fixed between
Lutheranism and the Papacy, as appeared also from the Augustana, in
which, however, the Emperor mistook moderation of tone for surrender
of substance.

#### 41. Augustana Submitted to Catholic Party.

Full of hope the Emperor, on June 26, immediately after its public
presentation, submitted the Lutheran Confession to the Catholic
estates for deliberation. These, too, though not in the least inclined
to abandon their arrogant attitude, seem to have given themselves over
to the delusion that the Lutherans could now be brought to recede from
their position. Accordingly, their answer (Responsum) of June 27,
couched in conciliatory language, recommended as "the humble opinion
of the electors and estates that the Imperial Roman Majesty would
submit this great and important matter to a number of highly learned,
sensible, honest, conciliating, and not spiteful persons, to
deliberate on, and to consider, the writing [the Augustana], as far as
necessary, enumerating, on the one hand, whatsoever therein was found
to be in conformity and harmony with the Gospel, God's Word, and the
holy Christian Church, but, on the other hand, refuting with the true
foundation of the Gospel and the Holy Scripture and its doctrine, and
bringing into true Christian understanding, such matters as were found
to be against, and out of harmony with, the Gospel, the Word of God,
and the Christian Church." (Laemmer, 32.) They recommended, however,
that in this entire matter Campegius be consulted, and for that
purpose be furnished with a copy of the Lutheran Confession.

The Romanists furthermore resolved that the Lutherans be asked
whether they had any additional points to present, and, if so, to do
this immediately. The Lutherans, considering this a snare, declared,
on July 10, that in their Confession they had made it a special point
to present the chief articles which it is necessary to believe in
order to be saved, but had not enumerated all abuses, desiring to
emphasize such only as burdened the consciences, lest the paramount
questions be obscured; that they would let this [all that was
enumerated in their Confession] suffice, and have included other
points of doctrine and abuses which were not mentioned; that they
would not fail to give an answer from the Word of God in case their
opponents should attack the Confession or present anything new.
(Foerstemann, 2, 16. _C.R._ 2, 181.) No doubt, the Papists felt that
the Lutherans really should have testified directly also against the
Papacy, etc. This, too, was the interpretation which Luther put on the
inquiry of the Romanists. July 21, 1530, he wrote to Jonas: "But now I
see what the questions aimed at whether you had other articles to
present. For Satan still lives and has noticed very well that your
Apology [Augustana] steps softly and has passed by the articles
concerning purgatory, the adoration of the saints, and especially
Antichrist, the Pope." (St. L. 16, 2323; Enders, 8, 133.)

July 5 the Emperor accepted the opinion of the estates and appointed
the confutators. At the same time he declared with reference to the
Lutherans that he "was the judge of the content of their writing"
(Augustana); that, in case they should not be satisfied with his
verdict, the final decision must remain with the Council; but that
meanwhile the Edict of Worms would be enforced everywhere. (Laemmer,
34; _C.R._ 2, 175.) Thus the Emperor, in unmistakable terms, indicated
that the Roman Confutation would bring his own final verdict, which no
further discussions could modify, and that he would compel the
Lutherans by force to observe the Edict of Worms if they refused to
submit willingly. The Catholic estates endorsed the Emperor's
declaration, but added the petition that, after the Confutation had
been read, the Lutherans be asked in all kindness to return, and that,
in case this remained fruitless, an attempt be made to bring about an
agreement to be reached by a committee appointed by both parties.
Evidently, the estates as well as the Emperor expected the Lutherans
to yield and surrender. Still, for the present, they were willing and
preferred to attain this end by mild and gentle means.

#### 42. Rabid Theologians Appointed as Confutators.

Canipegius, to whom the entire matter was entrusted, manipulated
things in such a manner that the result was the very opposite of what
the Emperor and estates bad resolved upon. To be sure, he made it
appear as though he were entirely neutral, leaving everything to the
discretion of the German princes. He knew also how to hide his real
sentiments from the Lutherans. Jonas, for example, reports that in his
address of June 24 Campegius had said "nothing harsh, or hateful
(nihil acerbe, nihil odiose) against the Lutherans." Spalatin reports:
"Some one besought the Legate and Cardinal Campegius to assist in
obtaining peace for the cause of the Gospel. To this he responded:
Since the papal power was suspicious to us, the matter rested with the
Emperor and the German princes. Whatever they did would stand."
(Koellner, _Symbolik_, 403.) Thus Campegius created the impression of
absolute neutrality, while in reality he was at the same time busy
with secret intrigues against the Lutherans.

Among the Confutators (Brueek mentions 19, Spalatin 20, others 22,
still others 24), selected by Campegius and appointed by the Emperor,
were such rabid, abusive, and inveterate enemies of Luther as Eck,
Faber, Cochlaeus, Wimpina, Colli (author of a slanderous tract against
Luther's marriage), Dietenberger, etc. The first three are repeatedly
designated as the true authors of the Confutation. In his _Replica ad
Bucerum_, Eck boasts: "Of all the theologians at Augsburg I was chosen
unanimously to prepare the answer to the Saxon Confession, and I
obeyed. _Augustae ab omnibus theologis fui delectus unanimiter, qui
responsum pararem contra confessionem Saxonicam, et parui_."
(Koellner, 407.) July 10 Brenz wrote to Myconius: "Their leader
(_antesignanus_) is that good man Eck. The rest are 23 in number. One
might call them an Iliad [Homer's Iliad consists of 24 books] of
sophists." (_C.R._ 2, 180.) Melanchthon, too, repeatedly designates
Eck and Faber as the authors of the Confutation. July 14 he wrote to
Luther: "With his legerdemain (_commanipulatione_) Eck presented to
the Emperor the Confutation of our Confession." (193.) August 6: "This
Confutation is the most nonsensical of all the nonsensical books of
Faber." (253.) August 8, to Myconius: "Eck and Faber have worked for
six entire weeks in producing the Confutation of our Confession."
(260.) Hence also such allusions in Melanchthon's letters as
"confutatio Fabrilis," "Fabriliter scripta," and in the Apology:
"Nullus Faber Fabrilius cogitare quidquam posset, quam hae ineptiae
excogitatae suiit ad eludendum ins naturae." (366, 10.) Brueck was
right when he said that some of the Confutators were "purely partial,
and altogether suspicious characters." (Koellner, 411.)

#### 43.Confutation Prepared.

The resolution which the Catholic estates passed
June 27 was to the effect that the imperial answer to the
Lutheran Confession be made "by sober and not spiteful
men of learning." The Emperor's Prolog to the
Confutation, accordingly, designated the confutators as
"certain learned, valiant, sensible, sober, and honorable
men of many nations." (C. R. 27, 189.) At the same time
they were told to couch their answer in winning, convincing,
moderate, and earnest terms. The imperial
instruction read: "To this end it is indeed good and
needful that said document [the Augustana] be carefully
considered and diligently studied by learned, wise,
and sober persons, in order that they [the Lutherans] be
shown in all kindness (durch gute Wege) where they err,
and be admonished to return to the good way, likewise,
to grant them whatsoever may be serviceable and
adapted to our holy Christian faith; and to set forth the
errors, moderately and politely, with such good and
holy arguments as the matter calls for, to defend and
prove everything with suitable evangelical declarations
and admonitions, proceeding from Christian and
neighborly love; and at the same time to mingle therewith
earnestness and severity with such moderation as
may be likely to win the five electors and princes, and
not to destroy their hope or to harden them still more."
(Koellner, 403)

However, inspired by Campegius and goaded on by
blind hatred, the Confutators employed their commission
for the purpose of casting suspicion on the
Lutherans and inciting the Emperor against them. They
disregarded the imperial admonition for moderation,
and instead of an objective answer to the Augustana,
they produced a long-winded pasquinade against
Luther and the Evangelical preachers, a fit companion
piece to the 404 theses of Eck--a general accusation
against the Protestants, a slanderous anthology of garbled
quotations from Luther, Melanchthon, and other
Evangelical preachers. The insinuation lurking in the
document everywhere was that the Confession of the
Lutheran princes was in glaring contradiction to the
real doctrine of their pastors. The sinister scheme of the
Romanists, as the Elector in 1536 reminded the
Lutheran theologians, was to bring the princes in opposition
to their preachers. (C. R. 3, 148.) The mildness
and moderation of the Augustana, they openly
declared, was nothing but subtle cunning of the smooth
and wily Melanchthon, who sought to hide the true
state of affairs. In a book which Cochlaeus published
against the Apology in 1534 he said that the open
attacks of Luther were far more tolerable than the serpentine
cunning and hypocrisy of Melanchthon (instar
draconis insidiantis fraudes intendens), as manifested in
particular by his demeanor toward Campegius at
Augsburg in 1530. (Laemmer, 56; Salig, 1, 376.) Thus
the Roman Confutators disregarded their commission
to refute the Augustana, and substituted a caricature of
Luther and his doctrines designed to irritate the
Emperor.

#### 44. A Bulky, Scurrilous Document.

The Confutation, compiled by Eck and Faber from
various contributions of the Confutators, was ready by
the 8th of July, and was presented to the Emperor on the
12th or 13th. The German translation was prepared by
the Bavarian Chancellor, Leonhard von Eck. July 10
Brenz had written: "It is reported that they are preparing
wagonloads of commentaries against our
Confession." (C. R. 2, 180.) Spalatin reports that the
Confutators delivered to the Emperor "a pile of books
against Doctor Martin with most scurrilous titles." The
chief document was entitled: "Catholic and, as it were,
Extemporaneous Response concerning Certain Articles
Presented in These Days at the Diet to the Imperial
Majesty by the Illustrious Elector of Saxony and Certain
Other Princes as well as Two Cities. Catholica et quasi
extemporanea Responsio super nonnullis articulis
Caesareae Maiestati hisce diebus in dieta imperiali
Augustensi per Illustrem Electorem Saxoniae et alios quosdam
Principes et duas Civitates oblatis." It was supplemented
by nine other treatises on all manner of alleged
contradictions and heresies of Luther and Anabaptistic
as well as other fruits of his teaching. (Laemmer, 37, C.
R. 2, 197.) The pasquinade with its supplements comprised
no less than 351 folios, 280 of which were devoted
to the answer proper. Cochlaeus also designates it as
"very severe and extended, acrior extensiorque." July 14
Melanchthon reported he had heard from friends that
the Confutation was "long and filled with scurrilities."
(193. 218.) July 15: "I am sending you [Luther] a list of
the treatises which our opponents have presented to the
Emperor, from which you will see that the Confutation
is supplemented by antilogs and other treatises in order
to stir up against us the most gentle heart of the
Emperor.Such are the stratagems these slanderers (sycophantae)
devise." (197.) The effect of the Confutation
on the Emperor, however, was not at all what its authors
desired and anticipated. Disgusted with the miserable
bulky botch, the Emperor convened the estates on July
15, and they resolved to return the bungling document
to the theologians for revision. Tone, method, plan,
everything displeased the Emperor and estates to such
an extent that they expunged almost one-third of it.
Intentionally they ignored the nine supplements and
demanded that reflections on Luther be eliminated
from the document entirely;moreover, that the theologians
confine themselves to a refutation of the
Augustana.(Laemmer, 39.) Cochlaeus writes:"Since the
Catholic princes all desired peace and concord, they
deemed it necessary to answer in a milder tone, and to
omit all reference to what the [Lutheran] preachers had
formerly taught and written otherwise than their
Confession stated." (Koellner, 406.) In a letter to Brueck
he declared that such coarse extracts and articles [with
which the first draft of the Confutation charged Luther]
should not be mentioned in the reply to the Confession,
lest any one be put to shame or defamed publicly.
(Laemmer, 39.)

In his Annals, Spalatin reports: "At first there were
perhaps 280 folios. But His Imperial Majesty is said to
have weeded out many folios and condensed the
Confutation to such an extent that not more than
twelve folios remained. This is said to have hurt and
angered Eck severely."(St. L. 21a, 1539.) In a letter to Veit
Dietrich, dated July 30,Melanchthon remarks sarcastically:
"Recently Eck complained to one of his friends
that the Emperor had deleted almost the third part of
his treatise, and I suspect that the chief ornaments of the
book were rooted out, that is, the glaring lies and the
most stupid tricks, insignia mendacia et sycophantiae
stolidissimae." (C. R. 2, 241.) Brenz regarded this as an
evidence of the extent to which the Augustana had perturbed
the opponents, leaving them utterly helpless.
July 15 he wrote to Isemann:"Meanwhile nothing new
has taken place in our midst, except that I heard that the
confession of the sophists was to-day returned by the
Emperor to its authors, the sophists, and this for the reason
that it was so confused, jumbled, vehement, bloodthirsty,
and cruel (confusa, incordita, violenta, sanguinolenta
et crudelis) that he was ashamed to have it read
before the Imperial Senate.... We experience daily that
we have so bewildered, stunned, and confused them
that they know not where to begin or to end." (198.)
"Pussyfooting (Leisetreten)!"--such was the slogan at
Augsburg; and in this Melanchthon was nowhere
equaled. Privately also Cochlaeus elaborated a milder
answer to the Lutheran Confession.But even the friends
who had induced him to undertake this task considered
his effort too harsh to be presented to the Emperor.
The first, rejected draft of the Confutation has been
lost, with the sole exception of the second article, preserved
by Cochlaeus. On the difference between this
draft and the one finally adopted, Plitt comments as follows:
"The Confutation as read simply adopted the first
article of the Confession [Augustana] as in complete
agreement with the Roman Church. The original draft
also approved this article's appeal to the Council of
Nicaea, but added that now the Emperor should
admonish the confessing estates to accept everything
else taught by the Catholic Church, even though it was
not verbally contained in the Scriptures, as, for example,
the Mass, Quadragesimal fasting, the invocation of the
saints, etc.; for the wording of the doctrine of the Trinity
could be found in the Scriptures just as little as that of
the points mentioned, furthermore, that he also call
upon them to acknowledge said Synod of Nicaea in all
its parts, hence also to retain the hierarchical degrees
with their powers; that he admonish them to compel
their preachers and teachers to retract everything which
they had said and written against that Synod, especially
Luther and Melanchthon, its public defamers.Refusal of
such retraction would invalidate their appeal to that
Synod and prove it to be nothing but a means of deception.
Finally they were to be admonished not to believe
their teachers in anything which was against the declarations
of the Church catholic. Such was the form in
which the first draft of the Confutation was couched.
Everywhere the tendency was apparent to magnify the
differences,make invidious inferences, cast suspicion on
their opponents, and place them in a bad light with the
Emperor and the majority. This was not the case in the
answer which was finally read." (37.)

#### 45.Confutation Adopted and Read.

Only after repeated revisions in which Campegius
and the imperial counselors Valdes and Granvella took
part was an agreement reached regarding the form of
the Confutation. July 30 the Emperor received the
fourth revision and on August 1 he presented it to the
bishops, princes, and estates for their opinion. There
still remained offensive passages which had to be eliminated.
A fifth revision was necessary before the approval
of the Emperor and the estates was forthcoming. A
Prolog and an Epilog were added according to which
the Confutation is drawn up in the name of the
Emperor. Thus the original volume was boiled down to
a comparatively small document. But to speak with
Kolde, even in its final form the Confutation is "still
rather an accusation against the Evangelicals, and an
effort to retain all the medieval church customs than a
refutation of the Augustana."(34.) August 6 Jonas wrote
to Luther:"The chaplain [John Henkel] of Queen Maria
informed us that they had five times changed their
Confutation, casting and recasting minting and reminting
it and still there finally was produced nothing but an
uncouth and confused conglomeration and a hodgepodge,
as when a cook pours different soups into one
pot.At first they patched together an enormous volume,
as Faber is known to be a verbose compiler; the book
grew by reason of the multitude of its lies and scurrilities.
However, at the first revision the Emperor eliminated
the third part of the book, so that barely twelve or
sixteen folios remained, which were read." (St. L. 21a,
1539.)

On August 3, 1530, in the same hall in which the
Augsburg Confession had been submitted thirty-eight
days before, in the presence of all the estates of the
empire, the Augustanae Confessionis Responsio,immediately
called Confutatio Pontificia by the Protestants,
was read in the German language by Alexander
Schweiss, the Imperial Secretary. However, the reading,
too, proved to be a discreditable affair. Owing to the
great haste in which the German copy had been prepared, an entire portion had been omitted; the result
was that the conclusion of Article 24 as well as Articles
25 and 26 were not presented. Furthermore, Schweiss,
overlooking the lines of erasure, read a part which had
been stricken, containing a very bold deliverance on the
sacrifice of the Mass, in which they labored to prove
from the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin that the word facite
in the institution of the Sacrament was synonymous
with "sacrifice." (Kolde, 34.) August 6, 1530, Jonas wrote
to Luther: The opponents presented their Confutation
to the Emperor on July 30, and on the 3d of August it
was read in the presence of the Emperor and the estates,
together with a Prolog and an Epilog of the Emperor.
"The reading also consumed two entire hours, but with
an incredible aversion, weariness, and disgust on the
part of some of the more sensible hearers, who complained
that they were almost driven out by this utterly
cold, threadbare songlet (cantilena), being extremely
chagrined that the ears of the Emperor should be
molested with such a lengthy array of worthless things
masquerading under the name of Catholic doctrines."
(St. L. 21 a, 1539.) August 4 Brenz wrote to Isemann:
"The Emperor maintains neutrality; for he slept both
when the Augustana and when the Confutation was
read. Imperator neutralem sese gerit; nam cum nostra
confessio legeretur obdormivit; rursus cum adversariorum
responsio legeretur, iterum obdormivit in media negotii
actione." (C. R. 2, 245.)

The Confutation was neither published, nor was a
copy of it delivered to the Lutherans. Apparently the
Romanists, notably the Emperor and the estates, were
ashamed of the document.True,Cochlaeus reports that
toward the close of the Diet Charles authorized him and
Eck to publish it, but that this was not done, because
Duke George and the Emperor left Augsburg shortly
after, and the printer also moved away. (Koellner, 414.)
All subsequent pleading and imploring,however,on the
part of Eck and others, to induce the Emperor to publish
the Confutation fell on deaf ears. Evidently Charles
no longer took any interest in a document that had so
shamefully shattered his fond ambition of reconciling
the religious parties. What appeared in print, early in
1531, was merely an extract prepared by Cochlaeus,
entitled, Summary of the Imperial Answer, etc. The first
Latin edition of the Confutation appeared as late as
1573; the first German edition, in 1808. All previous
German impressions (also the edition of 1584) are
translations of the Latin edition of 1573. (C. R. 27, 25.
82.) Concerning the German text of the Confutation
Kolde remarks: Since changes were made even after it
had been read, we have even less definite knowledge,
respecting details, as to what was read than in the case of
the Augustana. (35.) One may therefore also speak of a
Confutatio Variata. The doctrine of the Confutation
does not differ essentially from that which was later on
affirmed by the Council of Trent (1545¡V1563).
However, says Kolde, being written by the German leaders
of the Catholic party under the eye of the Papal
Legate, and approved by the Emperor, the German
bishops, and the Roman-minded princes, it [the
Confutation] must be reckoned among the historically
most important documents of the Roman Catholic
faith of that day.

#### 46.Confutation Denounced by Lutherans.

In the opinion of the Lutherans, the final draft of
the Confutation, too, was a miserable makeshift. True,
its tone was moderate, and, with few exceptions, personal
defamations were omitted. The arrangement of
subjects was essentially the same as in the Augustana.
Still it was not what it pretended to be. It was no serious
attempt at refuting the Lutheran Confession, but rather
an accumulation of Bible-texts, arbitrarily expounded,
in support of false doctrines and scholastic theories.
These efforts led to exegetical feats that made the
Confutators butts of scorn and derision.At any rate, the
Lutherans were charged with having failed, at the public
reading, to control their risibilities sufficiently.
Cochlaeus complains:"During the reading many of the
Lutherans indulged in unseemly laughter. Quando
recitata fuit, multi e Lutheranis inepte cachinnabantur."
(Koellner, 411.) If this did not actually occur, it was not
because the Confutators had given them no cause for
hilarity.

"Altogether childish and silly"--such is
Melanchthon's verdict on many of their exegetical
pranks. August 6 he wrote letter after letter to Luther,
expressing his contempt for the document. "After hearing
that Confutation," says Melanchthon,"all good people
seem to have been more firmly established on our
part, and the opponents, if there be among them some
who are more reasonable, are said to be disgusted
(stomachari) that such absurdities were forced upon the
Emperor, the best of princes." (C. R. 2, 252.) Again:
Although the Emperor's verdict was very stern and terrible,"
still, the Confutation being a composition so very
puerile, a most remarkable congratulation followed its
reading. No book of Faber's is so childish but that this
Confutation is still more childish."(253.) In another letter
he remarked that, according to the Confutation, in
which the doctrine of justification by faith was rejected,
"the opponents had no knowledge of religion whatever." (253.)

August 4 Brenz wrote to Isemann: "All things were
written in the fashion of Cochlaeus, Faber, and Eck.
Truly a most stupid comment, so that I am ashamed of
the Roman name, because in their whole Church they
can find no men able to answer us heretics at least in a
manner wise and accomplished. Sed omnia conscripta
erant Cochleice et Fabriliter et Eccianice. Commentum
sane stupidissimum, ut pudeat me Romani nominis, quod
in sua religione non conquirant viros, qui saltem prudenter
et ornate nobis haereticis responderent." (245.) August
15 Luther answered:"We received all of your letters, and
I praise God that he made the Confutation of the adversaries
so awkward and foolish a thing.However, courage
to the end! Verum frisch hindurch!" (Enders, 8, 190.)

#### 47. Luther on the Confutation.

Derision increased when the Papists declined to
publish the Confutation, or even to deliver a copy of it
to the Lutherans for further inspection.This refusal was
universally interpreted as an admission, on the part of
the Romanists, of a guilty conscience and of being
ashamed themselves of the document. In his Warning to
My Beloved Germans, which appeared early in 1531,
Luther wrote as follows:"But I am quite ready to believe
that extraordinary wisdom prompted them [the Papists
at Augsburg] to keep this rebuttal of theirs and that
splendid booklet [Confutation] to themselves, because
their own conscience tells them very plainly that it is a
corrupt, wicked, and frigid thing, of which they would
have to be ashamed if it were published and suffered
itself to be seen in the light or to endure an answer. For
I very well know these highly learned doctors who have
cooked and brewed over it for six weeks, though with
the ignorant they may be able to give the matter a good
semblance. But when it is put on paper, it has neither
hands nor feet, but lies there in a disorderly mass, as if a
drunkard had spewed it up, as may be seen, in particular,
in the writings of Doctor Schmid and Doctor Eck.
For there is neither rhyme nor rhythm in whatsoever
they are compelled to put into writing. Hence they are
more sedulous to shout and prattle. Thus I have also
learned that when our Confession was read, many of
our opponents were astonished and confessed that it
was the pure truth,which they could not refute from the
Scriptures. On the other hand, when their rebuttal was
read, they hung their heads, and showed by their gestures
that they considered it a mean and useless
makeshift as compared with our Confession. Our people,
however, and many other pious hearts were greatly
delighted and mightily strengthened when they heard
that with all the strength and art which our opponents
were then called upon to display, they were capable of
producing nothing but this flimsy rebuttal, which now,
praise God! a woman, a child, a layman, a peasant are
fully able to refute with good arguments taken from the
Scriptures, the Word of Truth. And that is also the true
and ultimate reason why they refused to deliver [to the
Lutherans a copy of] their refutation. Those fugitive evil
consciences were filled with horror at themselves, and
dared not await the answer of Truth.And it is quite evident
that they were confident, and that they had the
Diet called together in the conviction that our people
would never have the boldness to appear, but if the
Emperor should only be brought to Germany in person,
every one would be frightened and say to them:
Mercy, dear lords, what would you have us do? When
they were disappointed in this, and the Elector of
Saxony was the very first to appear on the scene, good
Lord,how their breeches began to--! How all their confidence
was confounded! What gathering together,
secret consultations, and whisperings resulted! ... The
final sum and substance of it all was to devise ways and
means (since our men were the first joyously and cheerfully
to appear) how to keep them from being heard
[block the reading of the Augustana]. When also this
scheme of theirs was defeated, they finally succeeded in
gaining the glory that they did not dare to hand over
their futile rebuttal nor to give us an opportunity to
reply to it! ...But some one might say: The Emperor was
willing to deliver the answer to our party provided they
would promise not to have it published nor its contents
divulged. That is true, for such a pledge was expected of
our men. Here, however, every one may grasp and feel
(even though he is able neither to see nor hear) what
manner of people they are who will not and dare not
permit their matter to come to the light. If it is so precious
a thing and so well founded in the Scriptures as
they bellow and boast, why, then, does it shun the light?
What benefit can there be in hiding from us and every
one else such public matters as must nevertheless be
taught and held among them? But if it is unfounded
and futile, why, then, did they in the first resolution [of
the Diet], have the Elector of Brandenburg proclaim
and publish in writing that our Confession had been
refuted [by the Confutation] with the Scriptures and
stanch arguments? If that were true, and if their own
consciences did not give them the lie, they would not
merely have allowed such precious and well-founded
Refutation to be read, but would have furnished us with
a written copy, saying: There you have it, we defy any
one to answer it! as we did and still do with our
Confession ...What the Elector of Brandenburg said in
the resolution [read at the Diet], that our Confession
was refuted with the Scriptures and with sound arguments,
is not the truth, but a lie ... For this well-founded
refutation [Confutation] has as yet not come to light,
but is perhaps sleeping with the old Tannhaeuser on
Mount Venus (Venusberg)." (St. L. 15, 1635.)

