---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: VI. The Apology (Defense) of the Augsburg Confession
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 06
---

#### 48. Emperor Demands Adoption of Confutation.

The Confutation was written in the name of the
Emperor.This is indicated by the title:"Roman Imperial
Confutation, Roemisch; Kaiserliche Konfutation." (C. R.
21, 189.) And according to his declaration of July 5,
demanding that the Lutherans acknowledge him as
judge, the Emperor, immediately before the reading,
announced: The Confutation contained his faith and
his verdict on the Confession of the Lutherans; he
demanded that they accept it; should they refuse to do
so, he would prove himself the warden and protector of
the Church. In the Epilog the Emperor gave expression
to the following thoughts: From this Confutation he
saw that the Evangelicals "in many articles agree with
the Universal and also the Roman Church, and reject
and condemn many wicked teachings current among
the common people of the German nation."He therefore
did not doubt that, having heard his answer to their
Confession, they would square themselves also in the
remaining points, and return to what, by common consent,
had hitherto been held by all true believers. Should
they fail to heed his admonition, they must consider
that he would be compelled to reveal and demean himself
in this matter in such manner as "by reason of his
office, according to his conscience, behooved the
supreme warden and protector of the Holy Christian
Church." (21, 228.) Immediately after the reading,
Frederick, Duke of the Palatinate, declared in the name
of the Emperor that the Confutation was the Emperor's
answer to the Lutherans, the verdict he rendered against
their Confession; and they were now called upon to
relinquish the articles of their Confession that were
refuted in the Confutation, and to return to the Roman
Church in unity of faith. (See the reports of Brenz,
Melanchthon, and the delegates from Nuernberg, C. R.
2, 245. 250. 253.) Thus the Emperor,who had promised
to have the deliberations carried on in love and kindness,
demanded blind submission, and closed his
demand with a threat.His manifesto was Protestant; his
actions remained Papistical. In the estimation of the
Romanists, the Emperor, by condescending to an
extended reply to the Lutheran Confession, had done
more than his duty, and much more than they had considered
expedient. Now they rejoiced, believing that
everything they wished for had been accomplished, and
that there was no other way open for the Lutherans than
to submit, voluntarily or by compulsion.
Naturally the attitude of the Emperor was a great
disappointment to the Lutherans, and it caused much
alarm and fear among them. From the very beginning
they had declared themselves ready in the interest of
peace, to do whatever they could "with God and conscience."
And this remained their position to the very
last.They dreaded war, and were determined to leave no
stone unturned towards avoiding this calamity. In this
interest even Philip of Hesse was prepared to go to the
very limits of possibility. Melanchthon wrote: "The
Landgrave deports himself with much restraint.He has
openly declared to me that in order to preserve peace,he
would accept even sterner conditions, as long as he did
not thereby disgrace the Gospel." (C. R. 2, 254.) But a
denial of God, conscience, and the Gospel was precisely
what the Emperor expected.Hence the Lutherans refer
to his demands as cruel, impossible of fulfilment, and as
a breach of promise. Outraged by the Emperor's procedure,
and fearing for his own safety, the Landgrave
secretly left the Diet on August 6.War seemed inevitable
to many. The reading of the Confutation had shattered
the last hopes of the Lutherans for a peaceful settlement.
They said so to each other, and wrote it to those at
home, though not all of them in the lachrymose tone of
the vacillating Melanchthon, who, filled with a thousand
fears was temporarily more qualified for depriving
others of their courage than for inspiring courage. (Plitt,
24.)

#### 49. Sustained by Luther.

In these days of severe trials and sore distress the
Lutherans were sustained by the comforting letters of
Luther and the bracing consciousness that it was the
divine truth itself which they advocated. And the reading
of the Confutation had marvelously strengthened
this conviction. Brueck reports an eyewitness of the
reading of the Augustana as saying: "The greater portion
among them [the Papists] is not so ignorant as not
to have seen long ago that they are in error." (Plitt, 18.)
Because of this conviction there was, as Melanchthon
reported, a "marvelous congratulation" among the
Lutherans after the reading of the Confutation. "We
stand for the divine truth, which God cannot but lead to
victory, while our opponents are condemned by their
own consciences,"멪such was the buoying conviction of
the Lutherans.And in this the powerful letters of Luther
strengthened the confessors at Augsburg. He wrote:
"This is the nature of our Christian doctrine, that it
must be held and grasped as certain and that every one
must think and be convinced: The doctrine is true and
sure indeed and cannot fail. But whoever falls to reasoning
and begins to waver within himself, saying: My
dear friend, do you believe that it is true, etc.? such a
heart will never be a true Christian." (Plitt, 12.)
Concerning the spiritual support which the confessors
at Augsburg, notably Melanchthon, received from
Luther, Plitt remarks: "What Luther did during his solitary
stay in the Castle at Coburg cannot be rated high
enough,His ideal deportment during these days, so trying
for the Church, is an example which at all times
Evangelical Christians may look up to, in order to learn
from him and to emulate him.What he wrote to his followers
in order to comfort and encourage them, can
and must at all times refresh and buoy up those who are
concerned about the course of the Church." (24.) June
30 Veit Dietrich who shared Luther's solitude at
Coburg,wrote to Melanchthon:"My dear Philip, you do
not know how concerned I am for your welfare, and I
beseech you for Christ's sake not to regard as vain the
Doctor's [Luther's] letters to you. I cannot sufficiently
admire that man's unique constancy, joy, confidence,
and hope in these days of most sore distress. And daily
he nourishes them by diligent contemplation of the
Word of God. Not a day passes in which he does not
spend in prayer at least three hours, such as are most
precious for study. On one occasion I chanced to hear
him pray.Good Lord,what a spirit, what faith spoke out
of his words! He prayed with such reverence that one
could see he was speaking with God, and withal with
such faith and such confidence as is shown by one who
is speaking with his father and friend. I know, said he,
that Thou art our Father and our God. Therefore I am
certain that Thou wilt confound those who persecute
Thy children. If Thou dost not do it, the danger is Thine
as well as ours. For the entire matter is Thine own.We
were compelled to take hold of it; mayest Thou therefore
also protect it, etc. Standing at a distance, I heard
him praying in this manner with a loud voice. Then my
heart, too, burned mightily within me, when he spoke
so familiarly, so earnestly, and reverently with God, and
in his prayer insisted on the promises in the Psalms, as
one who was certain that everything he prayed for
would be done. Hence I do not doubt that his prayer
will prove a great help in the desperately bad affair of
this Diet. And you, my teacher, would do far better to
imitate our father, the Doctor, also in this point. For
with your miserable cares and your weakling tears you
will accomplish nothing, but prepare a sad destruction
for yourself and us all, who take pleasure in, and are
benefited by nothing more than your welfare." (C. R. 2,
158f.; St. L. 15, 929f.)

#### 50.Copy of Confutation Refused to Lutherans.

Since the Confutation, in the manner indicated,
had been presented as the Emperor's final verdict upon
the Augsburg Confession the Lutherans were compelled
to declare themselves. Accordingly, Chancellor Brueck
at once responded to the demand for submission made
through the Palatinate after the reading of the
Confutation, saying: The importance of this matter,
which concerned their salvation, required that the
Confutation be delivered to the Lutherans for careful
inspection and examination to enable them to arrive at
a decision in the matter. The delegates from Nuernberg
reported, in substance: After the Confutation was read,
Doctor Brueck answered: Whereas, according to their
Confession, the Lutherans were willing to do and yield
everything that could be so done with a good conscience,
whereas, furthermore, according to the
Confutation, some of their [the Lutherans'] articles
were approved, others entirely rejected, still others partly
admitted to be right and partly repudiated; and
whereas the Confutation was a somewhat lengthy document:
therefore the Electors, princes, and cities
deemed it necessary to scan these articles more closely,
the more so, because many writings were adduced in
them that made it necessary to show to what intent, and
if at all they were rightly quoted, and accordingly
requested the Emperor, since he had promised to hear
both parties, to submit the Confutation for their inspection.
The Emperor answered: "As it was now late and
grown dark, and since the matter was important, he
would consider their request and reply to it later."
Hereupon, according to the Nuernberg delegates, "the
chancellor pleaded again and most earnestly that His
Imperial Majesty would consider this important and
great affair as a gracious and Christian emperor ought
to do, and not deny their prayer and petition, but deliver
to them the document which had been read." (C. R.
2, 251.)

Now, although the Romanists were in no way
minded and disposed to submit the Confutation to the
Lutherans, they nevertheless did not consider it wise to
refuse their petition outright and bluntly; for they realized
that this would redound to the glory neither of
themselves nor of their document. The fanatical theologians,
putting little faith in that sorry fabrication of their
own, and shunning the light, at first succeeded in having
a resolution passed declaring the entire matter settled
with the mere reading. However in order to save
their faces and to avoid the appearance of having
refused the Confutation as well as "the scorn and
ridicule on that account" (as the Emperor naively put
it), and "lest any one say that His Imperial Majesty had
not, in accordance with his manifesto, first dealt kindly
with" the Lutherans, the estates resolved on August 4 to
grant their request. At the same time, however, they
added conditions which the Lutherans regarded as dangerous,
insinuating and impossible, hence rendering the
Catholic offer illusory and unacceptable.

August 5 the Emperor communicated the resolutions
adopted by the Catholic estates to the Lutherans.
According to a report of the Nuernberg delegates the
negotiations proceeded as follows: The Emperor
declared that the Confutation would be forwarded to
the Lutherans, but with the understanding that they
must come to an agreement with the Catholic princes
and estates; furthermore that they spare His Imperial
Majesty with their refutations and make no further
reply and, above all, that they keep this and other writings
to themselves, nor let them pass out of their hands,
for instance, by printing them or in any other way.
Hereupon Brueck, in the name of the Lutherans,
thanked the Emperor, at the same time voicing the
request "that, considering their dire necessity, His
Imperial Majesty would permit his Elector and princes
to make answer to the Confutation." Duke Frederick
responded: The Emperor was inclined to grant them
permission to reply, but desired the answer to be "as
profitable and brief as possible," also expected them to
come to an agreement with the Catholics, and finally
required a solemn promise that they would not permit
the document to pass out of their hands. Brueck
answered guardedly: The Lutherans would gladly come
to an agreement "as far as it was possible for them to do
so with God and their conscience;" and as to their
answer and the preservation of the document, they
would be found "irreprehensible." The Emperor now
declared: "The document should be delivered to the
Lutherans in case they would promise to keep it to
themselves and not allow it to fall into other hands; otherwise
His Imperial Majesty was not minded to confer
with them any longer."Brueck asked for time to consider
the matter, and was given till evening. In his response
he declined the Emperor's offer, at the same time indicating
that an answer to the Confutation would be
forthcoming nevertheless. The Lutherans, he said, felt
constrained to relinquish their petition, because the
condition that the document be kept in their hands had
been stressed in such a manner that they could not but
fear the worst interpretation if it would nevertheless
leak out without their knowledge and consent; still, they
offered to answer the Confutation, since they had noted
the most important points while it was read; in this case,
however, they asked that it be not charged to them if
anything should be overlooked; at the same time they
besought the Emperor to consider this action of theirs
as compelled by dire necessity, and in no other light. (C.
R. 2, 255ff.) In the Preface to the Apology,Melanchthon
says: "This [a copy of the Confutation] our princes
could not obtain, except on the most perilous conditions,
which it was impossible for them to accept." (99.)

#### 51. Lutherans on Roman Duplicity and Perfidy.

The duplicity and perfidy of the Emperor and the
Romanists in their dealings with the Lutherans was
characterized by Chancellor Brueck as follows: "The
tactics of the opponents in offering a copy [of the
Confutation] were those of the fox when he invited the
stork to be his guest and served him food in a broad,
shallow pan, so that he could not take the food with his
long bill. In like manner they treated the five electors
and princes, as well as the related cities, when they
offered to accede to their request and submit a copy to
them, but upon conditions which they could not accept
without greatly violating their honor." (Koellner, 419.)
Over against the Emperor's demand of blind submission
and his threat of violence, the Lutherans appealed
to their pure Confession, based on the Holy Scriptures,
to their good conscience, bound in the Word of God,
and to the plain wording of the imperial manifesto,
which had promised discussions in love and kindness.
In an Answer of August 9, e.g., they declared: The articles
of the Augustana which we have presented are
drawn from the Scriptures, and "it is impossible for us
to relinquish them with a good conscience and peace of
heart, unless we find a refutation founded on God's
Word and truth, on which we may rest our conscience
in peace and certainty." (Foerstemann, 2, 185.) In the
Preface to the Apology,Melanchthon comments as follows
on the demand of the Romanists: "Afterwards,
negotiations for peace were begun, in which it was
apparent that our princes declined no burden, however
grievous, which could be assumed without offense to
conscience. But the adversaries obstinately demanded
that we should approve certain manifest abuses and
errors; and as we could not do this, His Imperial
Majesty again demanded that our princes should assent
to the Confutation. This our princes refused to do. For
how could they, in a matter pertaining to religion, assent
to a writing which they had not been able to examine,
especially as they had heard that some articles were condemned
in which it was impossible for them, without
grievous sin, to approve the opinions of the adversaries?"
(99.)

Self-evidently the Lutherans also protested publicly
that the procedure of the Romanists was in contravention
of the proclamation of the Emperor as well as of his
declaration on June 20, according to which both parties
were to deliver their opinions in writing for the purpose
of mutual friendly discussion. In the Answer of August
9, referred to above they said: "We understand His
Imperial Majesty's answer to mean nothing else than
that, after each party had presented its meaning and
opinion, such should here be discussed among us in
love and kindness."Hence, they said, it was in violation
of this agreement to withhold the Confutation, lest it be
answered. (Foerstemann, 2, 184f.) Luther expressed the
same conviction, saying: "All the world was awaiting a
gracious diet, as the manifesto proclaimed and pretended,
and yet, sad to say, it was not so conducted." (St. L.
16, 1636.)

That the Romanists themselves fully realized that
the charges of the Lutherans were well founded, appears
from the subterfuges to which they resorted in order to
justify their violence and duplicity, notably their refusal
to let them examine the Confutation. In a declaration of
August 11 they stated "that the imperial laws expressly
forbid, on pain of loss of life and limb, to dispute or
argue (gruppeln) about the articles of faith in any manner
whatever," and that in the past the edicts of the
Emperor in this matter of faith had been despised,
scorned, ridiculed, and derided by the Lutherans.
(Foerstemann, 2 190.) Such were the miserable arguments
with which the Romanists defended their treachery.
Luther certainly hit the nail on the head when he
wrote that the Romanists refused to deliver the
Confutation "because their consciences felt very well
that it was a corrupt, futile, and frigid affair, of which
they would have to be ashamed in case it should
become public and show itself in the light, or endure an
answer." (St. L. 16, 1635.)

#### 52. Original Draft of Apology.

August 5 the Lutherans had declared to the
Emperor that they would not remain indebted for an
answer to the Confutation, even though a copy of it was
refused them. They knew the cunning Romanists, and
had prepared for every emergency.Melanchthon, who,
according to a letter addressed to Luther (C. R. 2, 254),
was not present at the reading of the Confutation,
writes in the Preface to the Apology: "During the reading
some of us had taken down the chief points of the
topics and arguments." (101.) Among these was
Camerarius.August 4 the Nuernberg delegates reported
to their senate that the Confutation comprising more
than fifty pages, had been publicly read on August 3, at
2 P. M., and that the Lutherans had John
Kammermeister "record the substance of all the articles;
this he has diligently done in shorthand on his tablet as
far as he was able, and more than all of us were able to
understand and remember, as Your Excellency may perceive
from the enclosed copy." (C. R. 2, 250.)
On the basis of these notes the council of
Nuernberg had a theological and a legal opinion drawn
up, and a copy of the former (Osiander's refutation of
the Confutation) was delivered to Melanchthon on
August 18 by the Nuernberg delegates. Osiander specially
stressed the point that the demand of the
Romanists to submit to the decision of the Church in
matters of faith must be rejected, that, on the contrary,
everything must be subordinated to the Holy
Scriptures. (Plitt, 87.) In drawing up the Apology, however,
Melanchthon made little, if any, use of Osiander's
work. Such, at least, is the inference Kolde draws from
Melanchthon's words to Camerarius, September 20:
"Your citizens [of Nuernberg] have sent us a book on
the same subject [answer to the Confutation], which I
hope before long to discuss with you orally." (383.)
There can be little doubt that Melanchthon privately
entertained the idea of writing the Apology immediately
after the reading of the Confutation. The commission,
however, to do this was not given until later; and
most of the work was probably done in September. For
August 19 the Nuernberg delegates reported that their
"opinion" had been given to Melanchthon, who as yet,
however, had not received orders to write anything in
reply to the Confutation,"unless he is privately engaged
in such undertaking." (C. R. 2, 289.)
At Augsburg the execution of the resolution to
frame an answer to the Confutation had been sidetracked
for the time being, by the peace parleys between
the Lutherans and the Catholics,which began soon after
the Confutation was read and continued through
August. But when these miscarried, the Evangelical
estates, on the 29th of August, took official action
regarding the preparation of an Apology. Of the meeting
in which the matter was discussed the Nuernberg
delegates report:"It was furthermore resolved: 몬Since we
have recently declared before His Majesty that, in case
His Majesty refused to deliver to us the Confutation of
our Confession without restrictions [the aforementioned
conditions] we nevertheless could not refrain
from writing a reply to it, as far as the articles had been
noted down during the reading, and from delivering it
to His Imperial Majesty: we therefore ought to prepare
ourselves in this matter, in order to make use of it in case
of necessity,' In this we, the delegates of the cities, also
acquiesced.... I, Baumgaertner, also said: In case such a
work as was under discussion should be drawn up, we
had some opinions [the theological and the legal opinions
of the city of Nuernberg], which might be of service
in this matter, and which we would gladly submit.
Hereupon it was ordered that Dr. Brueck and other
Saxons be commissioned to draft the writing." (321.)
The assumption, therefore, that Melanchthon was the
sole author of the first draft of the Apology is erroneous.
In the Preface to the Apology he writes: "They had,
however, commanded me and some others to prepare an
Apology of the Confession, in which the reasons why
we could not accept the Confutation should be set forth
to His Imperial Majesty, and the objections made by the
adversaries be refuted." (101.) In the same Preface he
says that he had originally drawn up the Apology at
Augsburg, "taking counsel with others." (101.) However,
we do not know who, besides Brueck, these "others"
were.

#### 53.Apology Presented, But Acceptance Refused.

By September 20 Melanchthon had finished his
work. For on the same day he wrote to Camerarius:
"The verdict [decision of the Diet] on our affair has not
yet been rendered.... Our Prince thought of leaving yesterday,
and again to-day. The Emperor however, kept
him here by the promise that he would render his decision
within three days.... Owing to the statements of
evil-minded people, I am now remaining at home and
have in these days written the Apology of our
Confession, which, if necessary, shall also be delivered;
for it will be opposed to the Confutation of the other
party,which you heard when it was read. I have written
it sharply and more vehemently"(than the Confession).
(C. R. 2, 383.)

Before long, a good opportunity also for delivering
this Apology presented itself. It was at the meeting of the
Diet on September 22 when the draft of a final resolution
(Abschied) was read to the estates.According to this
decision, the Emperor offered to give the Evangelicals
time till April 15, 1531, to consider whether or not they
would unite with the Christian Church, the Holy
Father, and His Majesty "in the other articles," provided
however, that in the mean time nothing be printed and
absolutely no further innovations be made. The imperial
decision also declared emphatically that the
Lutheran Confession had been refuted by the
Confutation. The verdict claimed the Emperor "had, in
the presence of the other electors, princes, and estates of
the holy empire, graciously heard the opinion and confession
[of the Evangelical princes], had given it due and
thorough consideration, and had refuted and disproved
it with sound arguments from the holy gospels and the
Scriptures." (Foerstemann, 2, 475.)

Self-evidently, the Lutherans could not let this
Roman boast pass by in silence. Accordingly, in the
name of the Elector, Brueck arose to voice their objections,
and, while apologizing for its deficiencies, presented
the Apology. In his protest, Brueck dwelt especially
on the offensive words of the imperial decision
which claimed that the Augustana was refuted by the
Confutation. He called attention to the fact that the
Lutherans had been offered a copy only under impossible
conditions; that they had nevertheless, on the basis
of what was heard during the reading, drawn up a
"counter-plea, or reply;" this he was now holding in his
hands, and he requested that it be read publicly; from it
every one might learn "with what strong, irrefutable
reasons of Holy Scripture" the Augustana was fortified.
(Foerstemann, 2, 479.) Duke Frederick took the
Apology, but returned it on signal from the Emperor,
into whose ear King Ferdinand had been whispering.
Sleidan relates: "Cumque huiusce perventum esset,
Pontanus apologiam Caesari defert; eam ubi Fridericus
Palatinus accepit, subnuente Caesare, cui Ferdinandus
aliquid ad aures insusurraverat, reddit."A similar report
is found in the annals of Spalatin. (Koellner, 422.)

By refusing to accept the Apology, the Emperor and
the Romanists de facto broke off negotiations with the
Lutherans, and the breach remained, and became permanent.
September 23 the Elector left Augsburg. By the
time the second imperial decision was rendered,
November 19, all the Evangelical princes had left the
Diet. The second verdict dictated by the intolerant spirit
of the papal theologians, was more vehement than the
first. Confusing Lutherans, Zwinglians, and
Anabaptists, Charles emphasized the execution of the
Edict of Worms; sanctioned all dogmas and abuses
which the Evangelicals had attacked; confirmed the
spiritual jurisdiction of the bishops, demanded the
restoration of all abolished rites identified himself with
the Confutation, and repeated the assertion that the
Lutheran Confession had been refuted from the
Scriptures. (Foerstemann, 2, 839f.; Laemmer, 49.)

In his Gloss on the Alleged Imperial Edict of 1531,
Luther dilates as follows on the Roman assertion of having
refuted the Augustana from the Scriptures: "In the
first place concerning their boasting that our
Confession was refuted from the holy gospels, this is so
manifest a lie that they themselves well know it to be an
abominable falsehood.With this rouge they wanted to
tint their faces and to defame us, since they noticed very
well that their affair was leaky, leprous, and filthy, and
despite such deficiency nevertheless was to be honored.
Their heart thought: Ours is an evil cause, this we know
very well, but we shall say the Lutherans were refuted;
that's enough.Who will compel us to prove such a false
statement? For if they had not felt that their boasting
was lying, pure and simple, they would not only gladly,
and without offering any objections, have surrendered
their refutation as was so earnestly desired, but would
also have made use of all printing-presses to publish it,
and heralded it with all trumpets and drums, so that
such defiance would have arisen that the very sun would
not have been able to shine on account of it. But now,
since they so shamefully withheld their answer and still
more shamefully hide and secrete it, by this action their
evil conscience bears witness to the fact that they lie like
reprobates when they boast that our Confession has
been refuted, and that by such lies they seek not the
truth, but our dishonor and a cover for their shame."
(St. L. 16, 1668.)

#### 54.Apology Recast by Melanchthon.

Owing to the fact that Melanchthon, immediately
after the presentation of the Apology, resolved to revise
and recast it, the original draft was forced into the background.
It remained unknown for a long time and was
published for the first time forty-seven years after the
Diet. Chytraeus embodied it in his Historia Augustanae
Confessionis, 1578, with the caption, "Prima Delineatio
Caesari Carolo Die 22. Septembris Oblata, sed Non
Recepta멪The First Draft which was Offered to
Emperor Charles on September 22, but Not Accepted."
The German and Latin texts are found in Corp. Ref. 27,
275ff. and 322. Following is the Latin title:"Apols on the
following points: At this free, universal council the
Lutherans were pes persecuti sunt me gratis." The
German title runs:"Antwort der Widerlegung auf unser
Bekenntnis uebergeben." (245. 378.) Plitt says of the
original Apology: "It was well qualified to be presented
to the Emperor, and, in form also, far surpassed the
Confutation of the Papists. Still the Evangelical Church
suffered no harm when the Emperor declined to accept
it. The opportunity for revision which was thus offered
and fully exploited by Melanchthon, who was never able
to satisfy himself, resulted in a great improvement. The
Apology as it appeared the following year is much riper,
sharper in its rebuttal, and stronger in its argumentation."
(88.)

The draft of the Apology presented at Augsburg
concluded as follows: "If the Confutation had been forwarded
to us for inspection we would perhaps have
been able to give a more adequate answer on these and
additional points." (C. R. 27, 378.) When, therefore, the
Emperor had refused to accept it, Melanchthon determined
to revise, reenforce, and augment the document.
September 23 he left Augsburg in the company of the
Elector; and already while en route he began the work.
In his History of the Augsburg Confession, 1730, Salig
remarks: "Still the loss of the first copy [of the Apology]
does not seem to be so great, since we now possess the
Apology in a more carefully elaborated form. For while
the Diet was still in session, and also after the theologians
had returned home,Melanchthon was constantly
engaged upon it, casting it into an entirely different
mold, and making it much more extensive than it was
before. When the theologians had returned to Saxony
from the Diet, Melanchthon, in Spalatin's house at
Altenburg, even worked at it on Sunday, so that Luther
plucked the pen from his hand, saying that on this day
he must rest from such work." (1, 377.) However, since
the first draft was presented to the Emperor on
September 22, and Melanchthon, together with the
Elector, left Augsburg on the following day, it is evident
that he could not have busied himself very much with
the revision of the Apology at Augsburg. And that
Luther, in the Altenburg incident, should have put especial
stress on the Sunday, for this neither Salig nor those
who follow him (e.g., Schaff, Creeds, 1, 243) offer any
evidence. In his Seventeen Sermons on the Life of Luther,
Mathesius gives the following version of the incident:
"When Luther, returning home with his companions
from Coburg, was visiting Spalatin, and Philip, constantly
engrossed in thoughts concerning the Apology,
was writing during the meal, he arose and took the pen
away from him [saying]:몬God can be honored not alone
by work, but also by rest and recreation; for that reason
He has given the Third Commandment and commanded
the Sabbath.' " (243.) This report of Mathesius
certainly offers no ground for a Puritanic explanation of
the incident in Spalatin's home.

Originally Melanchthon does not seem to have
contemplated a revision on a very large scale. In the
Preface, which was printed first, he merely remarks that
he made "some additions" (quaedam adieci) to the
Apology drawn up at Augsburg. (101.) Evident]y at the
time when he wrote this, he had no estimate of the proportions
the work, which grew under his hands, would
finally assume. Before long also he obtained a complete
copy of the Confutation. It was probably sent to him
from Nuernberg, whose delegate had been able to send
a copy home on August 28, 1530. (Kolde, 37.) Says
Melanchthon in the Preface to the Apology: "I have
recently seen the Confutation, and have noticed how
cunningly and slanderously it was written, so that on
some points it could deceive even the cautious." (101.)
Eck clamored that the Confutation "had gotten into
Melanchthon's hands in a furtive and fraudulent manner,
furtim et fraudulenter ad manus Melanchthonis eandem
pervenisse." (Koellner, 426.) The possession of the
document enabled Melanchthon to deal in a reliable
manner with all questions involved, and spurred him
on to do most careful and thorough work.

#### 55.Completion of Apology Delayed.

Owing to the fact that Melanchthon spent much
more time and labor on the work than he had anticipated
and originally planned, the publication of the
Apology was unexpectedly delayed. October 1, 1530,
Melanchthon wrote to Camerarius: "Concerning the
word 몬liturgy' in the Apology I ask you again and again
carefully to search out for me its etymology as well as
examples of its meaning."November 12, to Dietrich: "I
shall describe them [the forms of the Greek mass] to
Osiander as soon as I have completed the Apology,
which I am now having printed and am endeavoring to
polish. In it I shall fully explain the most important controversies,
which, I hope,will prove profitable." (C. R. 2,
438.) In a similar strain he wrote to Camerarius,
November 18. (440.) January 1, 1531, again to
Camerarius:"In the Apology I experience much trouble
with the article of Justification, which I seek to explain
profitably." (470.) February, 1531, to Brenz: "I am at
work on the Apology. It will appear considerably augmented
and better founded.For this article, in which we
teach that men are justified by faith and not by love, is
treated exhaustively." (484.) March 7, to Camerarius:
"My Apology is not yet completed. It grows in the writing."(
486.) Likewise in March, to Baumgaertner:"I have
not yet completed the Apology, as I was hindered, not
only by illness, but also by many other matters, which
interrupted me, concerning the syncretism Bucer is stirring
up." (485.) March 17, to Camerarius:"My Apology
is making slower progress than the matter calls for."
(488.) Toward the end of March, to Baumgaertner:
"The Apology is still in press; for I am revising it entirely
and extending it." (492.) April 7, to Jonas: "In the
Apology I have completed the article on Marriage, in
which the opponents are charged with many real
crimes." (493.) April 8, to Brenz: "We have almost finished
the Apology. I hope it will please you and other
good people." (494.) April 11, to Camerarius: "My
Apology will appear one of these days. I shall also see
that you receive it. At times I have spoken somewhat
vehemently, as I see that the opponents despise every
mention of peace."(495.) Finally, in the middle of April,
to Bucer: "My Apology has appeared, in which, in my
opinion, I have treated the articles of Justification,
Repentance, and several others in such a manner that
our opponents will find themselves heavily burdened. I
have said little of the Eucharist." (498.)

These letters show that Melanchthon took particular
pains with the article of Justification, which was
expanded more than tenfold. January 31, he was still
hard at work on this article.Kolde says:"This was due to
the fact that he suppressed five and one-half sheets [preserved
by Veit Dietrich] treating this subject because
they were not satisfactory to him, and while he at first
treated Articles 4 to 6 together, he now included also
Article 20, recasting anew the entire question of the
nature of justification and the relation of faith and good
works. Illness and important business, such as the negotiations
with Bucer on the Lord's Supper, brought new
delays. He also found it necessary to be more explicit
than he had contemplated. Thus it came about that the
work could first appear, together with the Augustana,
end of April, or, at the latest, beginning of May." (37)
According to the resolution of the Diet, the Lutherans
were to have decided by April 15 1531, whether they
would accept the Confutation or not. The answer of the
Lutherans was the appearance, on the bookstalls, of the
Augustana and the Apology, and a few days prior, of
Luther's "Remarks on the Alleged Imperial Edict,
Glossen auf das vermeinte kaiserliche Edikt."

#### 56. German Translation by Jonas.

The Apology was written in Latin. The editio princeps
in quarto of 1531 contained the German and the
Latin texts of the Augsburg Confession, and the Latin
text of the Apology. From the very beginning, however,
a German translation was, if not begun, at least
planned. But, though announced on the title-page of
the quarto edition just referred to, it appeared six
months later, in the fall of 1531. It was the work of
Justus Jonas. The title of the edition of 1531 reads:
"Apologie der Konfession, aus dem Latein verdeutscht
durch Justus Jonas, Wittenberg. Apology of the
Confession done into German from the Latin by Justus
Jonas, Wittenberg." For a time Luther also thought of
writing a "German Apology." April 8, 1531,
Melanchthon wrote to Brenz: "Lutherus nunc instituit
apologiam Germanicam. Luther is now preparing a
German Apology." (C. R. 2, 494. 501.) It is, however,
hardly possible that Luther was contemplating a translation.
Koellner comments on Melanchthon's words:
"One can understand them to mean that Luther is
working on the German Apology." Instituit however,
seems to indicate an independent work rather than a
translation. Koestlin is of the opinion that Luther
thought of writing an Apology of his own, because he
was not entirely satisfied with Melanchthon's. (Martin
Luther 2, 382.) However, if this view is correct, it certainly
cannot apply to Melanchthon's revised Apology,
to which Luther in 1533 expressly confessed himself, but
to the first draft at Augsburg, in which, e.g., the 10th
Article seems to endorse the concomitance doctrine.
(Lehre und Wehre 1918, 385.) At all events, Luther
changed his plan when Jonas began the translation of
the new Apology.

The translation of Jonas is not a literal reproduction
of the Latin original, but a version with numerous
independent amplifications. Also Melanchthon had a
share in this work. In a letter of September 26, 1531, he
says: "They are still printing the German Apology, the
improvements of which cost me no little labor." (e.g. 2,
542.) The deviations from the Latin original therefore
must perhaps be traced to Melanchthon rather than to
Jonas. Some of them are due to the fact that the translation
was based in part not on the text of the editio princeps,
but on the altered Latin octavo edition, copies of
which Melanchthon was able to send to his friends as
early as September 14. See, for example the 10th Article,
where the German text follows the octavo edition in
omitting the quotation from Theophylact. The German
text appeared also in a separate edition, as we learn from
the letter of the printer Rhau to Stephen Roth of
November 30, 1531: "I shall send you a German
Apology, most beautifully bound." (Kolde, 39.) German
translations adhering strictly to the text of the editio
princeps are of a much later date.

#### 57. Alterations of Apology.

Melanchthon, who was forever changing and
improving, naturally could not leave the Apology as it
read in the first edition. This applies to both the
German and the Latin text.He was thinking of the Latin
octavo edition when he wrote to Brenz, June 7, 1531:
"The Apology is now being printed, and I am at pains
to make some points in the article of Justification clearer.
It is an extremely great matter, in which we must proceed
carefully that Christ's honor may be magnified."(2,
504.) The same edition he had in mind when he wrote
to Myconius, June 14, 1531: "My Apology is now in
press, and I am endeavoring to present the article of
Justification even more clearly; for there are some things
in the solution of the arguments which are not satisfactory
to me." (506.) Accordingly, this octavo edition, of
which Melanchthon was able to send a copy to
Margrave George on September 14, revealed important
alterations: partly improvements, partly expansions,
partly deletions. The changes in the 10th Article, already
referred to, especially the omission of the quotation
from Theophylact, attracted most attention. The succeeding
Latin editions likewise revealed minor changes.
The Apology accompanying the Altered Augsburg
Confession of 1540, was designated by Melanchthon
himself as "diligenter recognita, diligently revised." (C. R.
26, 357. 419.)

Concerning the German Apology, Melanchthon
wrote to Camerarius on January 1, 1533: "I have more
carefully treated the German Apology and the article of
Justification, and would ask you to examine it. If you
have seen my Romans [Commentary on the Epistle to
the Romans], you will be able to notice how exactly and
methodically I am endeavoring to explain this matter. I
also hope that intelligent men will approve it. For I have
done this in order to explain necessary matters and to
cut off all manner of questions, partly false, partly useless."
(C. R. 2, 624.) About the same time he wrote to
Spalatin:"Two articles I have recast entirely:Of Original
Sin and Of Righteousness. I ask you to examine them,
and hope that they will profit pious consciences. For in
my humble opinion I have most clearly presented the
doctrine of Righteousness and ask you to write me your
opinion."(625.) Kolde says of this second revision of the
German text of 1533: "This edition, which
Melanchthon described as 몬diligently amended,' is much
sharper in its tone against the Romanists than the first
and reveals quite extensive changes. Indeed, entire articles
have been remodeled, such as those Of Justification
and Good Works, Of Repentance. Of the Mass, and also
the statements on Christian perfection." (41.) These
alterations in the Latin and German texts of the
Apology, however, do not involve changes in doctrine,
at least not in the same degree as in the case of the
Augustana Variata of 1540. Self-evidently, it was the text
of the first edition of the German as well as the Latin
Apology that was embodied in the Book of Concord.

#### 58. Purpose, Arrangement, and Character of Apology.

The aim of the Apology was to show why the
Lutherans "do not accept the Confutation," and to
puncture the papal boast that the Augustana had been
refuted with the Holy Scriptures. In its Preface we read:
"Afterwards a certain decree was published [by the
Emperor], in which the adversaries boast that they have
refuted our Confession from the Scriptures. You have
now, therefore, reader, our Apology, from which you
will understand not only what the adversaries have
judged (for we have reported in good faith), but also
that they have condemned several articles contrary to
the manifest Scripture of the Holy Ghost, so far are they
from overthrowing our propositions by means of the
Scriptures." (101.) The Apology is, on the one hand, a
refutation of the Confutation and, on the other hand, a
defense and elaboration of the Augustana, presenting
theological proofs for the correctness of its teachings.
Hence constant reference is made to the Augsburg
Confession as well as the Confutation; and scholastic
theology is discussed as well. On this account also the
sequence of the articles, on the whole, agrees with that
of the Augustana and the Confutation. However, articles
treating of related doctrines are collected into one,
e.g., Articles 4, 5, 6, and 20. Articles to which the
Romanists assented are but briefly touched upon. Only
a few of them have been elaborated somewhat e.g., Of
the Adoration of the Saints, Of Baptism, Of the Lord's
Supper, Of Repentance, Of Civil Government. The
fourteen articles, however, which the Confutation
rejected are discussed extensively, and furnished also
with titles, in the editio princeps as well as in the Book of
Concord of 1580 and 1584. In Mueller's edition of the
Symbolical Books all articles of the Apology are for the
first time supplied with numbers and captions corresponding
with the Augsburg Confession.

In the Apology, just as in the Augsburg Confession,
everything springs from, and is regulated by, the fundamental
Lutheran principle of Law and Gospel, sin and
grace, faith and justification.Not only is the doctrine of
justification set forth thoroughly and comfortingly in a
particular article, but throughout the discussions it
remains the dominant note, its heavenly strain returning
again and again as the motif in the grand symphony
of divine truths멪a strain with which the Apology also
breathes, as it were, its last, departing breath. For in its
Conclusion we read: "If all the scandals [which, according
to the Papists, resulted from Luther's teaching] be
brought together, still the one article concerning the
remission of sins (that for Christ's sake, through faith,
we freely obtain the remission of sins) brings so much
good as to hide all evils. And this, in the beginning [of
the Reformation], gained for Luther not only our favor,
but also that of many who are now contending against
us." (451, 23.)

In Kolde's opinion, the Apology is a companion
volume, as it were, to Melanchthon's Loci Communes,
and a theological dissertation rather than a confession.
However, theological thoroughness and erudition do
not conflict with the nature of a confession as long as it
is not mere cold intellectual reflection and abstraction,
but the warm, living, and immediate language of the
believing heart.With all its thoroughness and erudition
the Apology is truly edifying, especially the German version.
One cannot read without being touched in his
inmost heart,without sensing and feeling something of
the heart-beat of the Lutheran confessors. Jacobs, who
translated the Apology into English, remarks: "To one
charged with the cure of souls the frequent reading of
the Apology is invaluable; in many (we may say, in
most) parts it is a book of practical religion." (The Book
of Concord 2, 41.) The Apology does not offer all manner
of theories of idle minds, but living testimonies of
what faith, while struggling hotly with the devil and languishing
in the fear of death and the terrors of sin and
the Law found and experienced in the sweet Gospel as
restored by Luther. In reading the Apology, one can tell
from the words employed how Melanchthon lived,
moved, and fairly reveled in this blessed truth which in
opposition to all heathen work-righteousness teaches
terrified hearts to rely solely and alone on grace. In his
History of Lutheranism (2, 206) Seckendorf declares that
no one can be truly called a theologian of our Church
who has not diligently and repeatedly read the Apology
or familiarized himself with it. (Salig, 1, 375.)

#### 59.Moderate Tone of Apology.

The tone of the Apology is much sharper than that
of the Augsburg Confession. The situation had
changed; hence the manner of dealing with the opposition
also changed. The Romanists had fully revealed
themselves as implacable enemies, who absolutely
refused a peace on the basis of truth and justice. In the
Conclusion of the Apology we read: "But as to the want
of unity and dissension in the Church, it is well known
how these matters first happened and who caused the
division namely, the sellers of indulgences, who shamefully
preached intolerable lies, and afterwards condemned
Luther for not approving of those lies, and
besides, they again and again excited more controversies,
so that Luther was induced to attack many other
errors. But since our opponents would not tolerate the
truth, and dared to promote manifest errors by force it
is easy to judge who is guilty of the schism. Surely, all the
world, all wisdom, all power ought to yield to Christ
and his holy Word. But the devil is the enemy of God,
and therefore rouses all his might against Christ to
extinguish and suppress the Word of God. Therefore
the devil with his members, setting himself against the
Word of God, is the cause of the schism and want of
unity. For we have most zealously sought peace, and still
most eagerly desire it, provided only we are not forced
to blaspheme and deny Christ.For God, the discerner of
all men's hearts, is our witness that we do not delight
and have no joy in this awful disunion. On the other
hand, our adversaries have so far not been willing to
conclude peace without stipulating that we must abandon
the saving doctrine of the forgiveness of sin by
Christ with out our merit,though Christ would be most
foully blasphemed thereby." (451.)

Such being the attitude of the Romanists, there was
no longer any reason for Melanchthon to have any special
consideration for these implacable opponents of the
Lutherans and hardened enemies of the Gospel, of the
truth, and of religious liberty and peace. Reconciliation
with Rome was out of the question. Hence he could
yield more freely to his impulse here than in the
Augustana; for when this Confession was written an
agreement was not considered impossible. In a letter of
July 15, 1530, informing Luther of the pasquinades
delivered to the Emperor,Melanchthon declared: "If an
answer will become necessary, I shall certainly remunerate
these wretched, bloody men. Si continget, ut
respondendum sit, ego profecto remunerabor istos nefarios
viros sanguinum." (C. R. 2, 197.) And when about to
conclude the Apology, he wrote to Brenz,April 8, 1531:
"I have entirely laid aside the mildness which I formerly
exercised toward the opponents. Since they will not
employ me as a peacemaker, but would rather have me
as their enemy, I shall do what the matter requires, and
faithfully defend our cause." (494.) But while
Melanchthon castigates the papal theologians, he spares
and even defends the Emperor.

In Luther's Remarks on the Alleged Imperial Edict,of
1531, we read: "I, Martin Luther, Doctor of the Sacred
Scriptures and pastor of the Christians at Wittenberg, in
publishing these Remarks,wish it to be distinctly understood
that anything I am writing in this booklet against
the alleged imperial edict or command is not to be
viewed as written against his Imperial Majesty or any
higher power, either of spiritual or civil estate.... I do not
mean the pious Emperor nor the pious lords, but the
traitors and reprobates (be they princes or bishops),and
especially that fellow whom St. Paul calls God's opponent
(I should say God's vicar), the arch-knave, Pope
Clement, and his servant Campegius, and the like, who
plan to carry out their desperate, nefarious roguery
under the imperial name, or, as Solomon says, at court."
(16, 1666.) Luther then continues to condemn the Diet
in unqualified terms."What a disgraceful Diet," says he,
"the like of which was never held and never heard of,
and nevermore shall be held or heard of, on account of
his disgraceful action! It cannot but remain an eternal
blot on all princes and the entire empire, and makes all
Germans blush before God and all the world." But he
continues exonerating and excusing the Emperor: "Let
no one tremble on account of this edict which they so
shamefully invent and publish in the name of the pious
Emperor. And should they not publish their lies in the
name of a pious Emperor, when their entire blasphemous,
abominable affair was begun and maintained for
over six hundred years in the name of God and the Holy
Church?" (16, 1634.)

In a similar manner Melanchthon, too, treats the
Emperor. He calls him "optimum imperatorem," and
speaks of "the Emperor's most gentle disposition, mansuetissimum
Caesaris pectus," which Eck and his party
were seeking to incite to bloodshed. (C.R. 2, 197.) In the
Preface he says: "And now I have written with the greatest
moderation possible; and if any expression appears
too severe, I must say here beforehand that I am contending
with the theologians and monks who wrote the
Confutation, and not with the Emperor or the princes,
whom I hold in due esteem." (101.) In Article 23
Melanchthon even rises to the apostrophe: "And these
their lusts they ask you to defend with your chaste right
hand, Emperor Charles (whom even certain ancient
predictions name as the king of modest face; for the saying
appears concerning you: 몬One modest in face shall
reign everywhere')." (363.)

The Confutators, however, the a vowed enemies of
truth and peace, were spared no longer. Upon them
Melanchthon now pours out the Iye of bitter scorn.He
excoriates them as "desperate sophists, who maliciously
interpret the holy Gospel according to their dreams,"
and as "coarse, sluggish, inexperienced theologians."He
denounces them as men "who for the greater part do
not know whereof they speak," and "who dare to
destroy this doctrine of faith with fire and sword," etc.
Occasionally Melanchthon even loses his dignified
composure. Article 6 we read: "Quis docuit illos asinos
hanc dialecticam?" Article 9: "Videant isti asini." In his
book of 1534 against the Apology,Cochlaeus complains
that the youthful Melanchthon called old priests asses,
sycophants, windbags, godless sophists, worthless hypocrites,
etc. In the margin he had written: "Fierce and
vicious he is, a barking dog toward those who are
absent, but to those who were present at Augsburg,
Philip was more gentle than a pup. Ferox et mordax est,
latrator in absentes, praesentes erat Augustae omni catello
blandior Philippus." (Salig, 1, 377.)

On this score, however, Cochlaeus and his papal
compeers had no reason to complain, for they had
proved to be past masters in vilifying and slandering the
Lutherans, as well as implacable enemies, satisfied with
nothing short of their blood and utter destruction.As a
sample of their scurrility W.Walther quotes the following
from a book written by Duke George of Saxony:"Er
[Luther] ist gewiss mit dem Teufel besessen, mit der
ganzen Legion, welche Christus von den Besessenen
austrieb und erlaubte ihnen, in die Schweine zu fahren.
Diese Legion hat dem Luther seinen Moenchschaedel
hirnwuetig und wirbelsuechtig gemacht. Du unruhiger,
treuloser und meineidiger Kuttenbube! Du bist allein
der groesste, groebste Esel und Narr, du verfluchter
Apostat! Hieraus kann maenniglich abnehmen die
Verraeterei und Falschheit deines blutduerstigen
Herzens, rachgierigen Gemuets und teuflischen
Willens, so du, Luther, gegen deinen Naechsten tobend,
als ein toerichter Hund mit offenem Maul ohne
Unterlass wagest. Du treuloser Bube und teuflischer
Moench! Du deklarierter Mameluck and verdammter
Zwiedarm, deren neun einen Pickharden gelten. Ich
sage vornehmlich, dass du selbst der aller unverstaendigste
Bacchant und zehneckichte Cornut und
Bestia bist. Du meineidiger, treuloser und ehrenblosser
Fleischboesewicht! Pfui dich nun, du sakrilegischer, der
ausgelaufenen Moenche und Nonnen, der abfaelligen
Pfaffen und aller Abtruennigen Hurenwirt! Ei, Doktor
Schandluther! Mein Doktor Erzesel, ich will dir's
prophezeit haben, der allmaechtige Gott wird dir kuerzlich
die Schanze brechen und deiner boshaftigsten,
groebsten Eselheit Feierabend geben. Du Sauboze,
Doktor Sautrog! Doktor Eselsohr! Doktor Filzhut!
Zweiundsiebzig Teufel sollen dich lebendig in den
Abgrund der Hoelle fuehren. Ich will machen, dass du
als ein Hoellenhund sollst Feuer ausspruehen und dich
endlich selbst verbrennen. Ich will dich dem wuetenigen
Teufel und seiner Hurenmutter mit einem blutigen
Kopf in den Abgrund der Hoelle schicken." (Luthers
Charakter, 148.)

Despite the occasional asperity referred to, the
Apology, as a whole, is written with modesty and moderation.
Melanchthon sought to keep the track as clear
as possible for a future understanding. In the interest of
unity, which he never lost sight of entirely, he was conservative
and not disposed needlessly to widen the existing
gulf. In the Preface to the Apology he declares: "It
has always been my custom in these controversies to
retain, so far as I was at all able, the form of the customarily
received doctrine, in order that at some time concord
could be reached the more readily.Nor, indeed, am
I now departing far from this custom, although I could
justly lead away the men of this age still farther from the
opinions of the adversaries." (101.) This irenic feature is
perhaps most prominent in the 10th Article, Of the
Lord's Supper, where Melanchthon, in order to satisfy
the opponents as to the orthodoxy of the Lutherans in
the doctrine of the Real Presence, emphasizes the agreement
in such a manner that he has been misunderstood
as endorsing also the Romish doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

#### 60. Symbolical Authority of Apology.

The great importance ascribed to the Apology
appears both from its numerous reprints and the strenuous
endeavors of the opponents to oppose it with
books, which, however, no one was willing to print. The
reception accorded it by the Lutherans is described in a
letter which Lazarus Spengler sent to Veit Dietrich May
17: "We have received the Apology with the greatest joy
and in good hope that it will be productive of much
profit among our posterity."Brenz declares it worthy of
the canon [worthy of symbolical authority]:
"Apologiam, me iudice, canone dignam" (C. R. 2, 510),
a phrase which Luther had previously applied to
Melanchthon's Loci. The joy of the Lutherans was
equaled only by the consternation of their enemies. The
appearance of the Apology surprised and perturbed
them. They keenly felt that they were again discredited
in the public opinion and had been outwitted by the
Lutherans. On November 19 Albert of Mayence sent a
copy of the Apology to the Emperor in order to show
him how the Catholic religion was being destroyed
while the Confutation remained unpublished.
Cochlaeus complained that to judge from letters
received, the Apology found approval even in Rome,
whereas no printer could be found for Catholic replies
to the Apology. He wrote: "Meantime, while we keep
silence, they flaunt the Apology and other writings, and
not only insult us, but cause our people and cities to
doubt and to grow unstable in the faith." (Kolde, 40.)
The Apology, as revised and published by
Melanchthon, was a private work.His name, therefore,
appeared on the title-page of the edition of 1531, which
was not the case with respect to the Confession and
Apology presented at Augsburg. The latter were official
documents, drawn up by order of the Lutheran princes
and estates, while the revised Apology was an undertaking
for which Melanchthon had received no commission.
Accordingly, as he was not justified in publishing a
work of his own under the name of the princes, there
was nothing else for him to do than to affix his own signature.
In the Preface to the Apology he says: "As it
passed through the press, I made some additions.
Therefore I give my name, so that no one can complain
that the book has been published anonymously." (100.)
Melanchthon did not wish to make any one beside himself
responsible for the contents of the revised Apology.

Before long, however, the Apology received official
recognition. At Schweinfurt, 1532, in opposition to the
Papists, the Lutherans appealed to the Augustana and
Apology as the confession of their faith, designating the
latter as "the defense and explanation of the
Confession."And when the Papists advanced the claim
that the Lutherans had gone farther in the Apology than
in the Augustana, and, April 11, 1532, demanded that
they abide by the Augustana, refrain from making the
Apology their confession, and accordingly substitute
"Assertion" for the title "Apology," the Lutherans, considering
the Apology to be the adequate expression of
their faith, insisted on the original title. April 17 they
declared: "This book was called Apology because it was
presented to Caesar after the Confession; nor could they
suffer its doctrine and the Word of God to be bound
and limited, or their preachers restricted to teach nothing
else than the letter of the Augsburg Confession, thus
making it impossible for them to rebuke freely and
most fully all doctrinal errors, abuses, sins, and crimes.
Nominatum fuisse Apologiam scriptum illud, quod
Caesari post Confessionem exhibitum sit, neque se pati
posse, ut doctrina sua et Verbum Dei congustetur, imminuatur
et concionatores astringantur, ut nihil aliud praedicent
quam ad litteram Augustanae Confessionis, neque
libere et plenissime adversus omnes errores doctrinae,
abusus, peccata et crimina dicere possint."Hereupon the
Romanists, on April 22, demanded that at least a qualifying
explanation be added to the title Apology. Brueck
answered on the 23d: "It is not possible to omit this
word. The Apology is the correlate of the Confession.
Still the princes and their associates do not wish any
articles taught other than those which have so far begun
to be discussed. Omitti istud verbum non posse;
Apologiam esse correlatum Confessionis; nolle tamen
Principes et socios, ut alii articuli docerentur quam
huiusque tractari coepti sint." (Koellner, 430.)

In his Letter of Comfort, 1533, to the Leipzig
Lutherans banished by Duke George, Luther says:
"There is our Confession and Apology ...Adhere to our
Confession and Apology." (10, 1956.) Membership in
the Smalcald League was conditioned on accepting the
Apology as well as the Augustana. Both were also subscribed
to in the Wittenberg Concord of 1536. (C. R. 3,
76.) In 1537, at Smalcald, the Apology (together with
the Augustana and the Appendix Concerning the
Primacy of the Pope) was, by order of the Evangelical
estates, subscribed by all of the theologians present, and
thereby solemnly declared a confession of the Lutheran
Church. In 1539 Denmark reckoned the Apology
among the books which pastors were required to adopt.
In 1540 it was presented together with the Augustana at
Worms. It was also received into the various corpora
doctrinae. The Formula of Concord adopts the Apology,
saying: "We unanimously confess this [Apology] also,
because not only is the said Augsburg Confession
explained in it as much as is necessary and guarded
[against the slanders of the adversaries], but also proved
by clear, irrefutable testimonies ofHoly Scripture."(853,
6.)

