---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: IX. The Small and the Large Catechism of Luther.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 09
---

#### 99. Luther Beginning Work on Catechisms.

Luther first mentioned the plan of publishing a catechism
in a letter of February 2, 1525, to Nicolaus
Hausmann. He informs him: "Jonas and Eisleben
[Agricola] have been instructed to prepare a catechism
for children. I am devoting myself to the Postil [last part
of the Winter Postil] and to Deuteronomy, where I have
sufficient work for the present." (Enders, 5, 115.) In a
letter of March 26, 1525, also to Hausmann, Luther
repeats: "The Catechism, as I have written before, has
been given to its authors, ist seinen Verfassern aufgetragen
worden." (144.) However, when Jonas and Agricola
(who soon moved from Wittenberg to Eisleben) failed,.
Luther resolved to undertake the work himself, which,
according to his letter of February 2, he had declined
merely for the reason that he was already sufficiently
burdened. The execution of his plan, however, was
deferred. September 27, 1525, he wrote to Hausmann:
"I am postponing the Catechism, as I would like to finish
everything at one time in one work." (246.) The
same letter shows what Luther meant. For here he
speaks of the reformation of the parishes and of the
introduction of uniform ceremonies.Evidently, then, he
at that time desired to publish the Catechism together
with a visitation tract, such as Melanchthon wrote in
1527. Besides, his Prayer-Booklet, containing the "Brief
Form," as well as the Booklet for Laymen and Children,
offered a temporary substitute for the contemplated
Catechism. The deplorable conditions, however, which
the Saxon visitation brought to light would not permit
him to tarry any longer."The deplorable, miserable condition,"
says Luther in the Preface to his Small
Catechism,"which I discovered lately when I, too, was a
visitor, has forced and urged me to prepare this
Catechism, or Christian doctrine, in this small, plain,
simple form." (535, 1.) Thus the Small Catechism
sprang, as it were, directly from the compassion Luther
felt for the churches on account of the sad state of destitution
to which they had been brought, and which he
felt so keenly during the visitation. However, Luther's
statements in the German Order ofWorship concerning
the catechetical procedure in question and answer
quoted above show that the thought of such a
Catechism did not first occur to him at this time. Still it
was the visitation that added the decisive impulse to put
the idea into immediate execution. Besides, it was a time
in which Luther was entirely engrossed in the
Catechism, having preached in 1528 on the five chief
parts no less than three times. Thus the harvest was at
hand. In January, 1529, according to his own letters,
Luther was engaged in this work, having probably
begun about the close of 1528. He was able to make
rapid progress, since ample material was at his command.

The old moot question which of the two
Catechisms appeared first was decided when Buchwald
discovered the Stephan Roth letters, which show that
the Small Catechism appeared in chart form in January
and March, 1529, while the first Wittenberg book edition
appeared in May, after the Large Catechism had
meanwhile come off the press in April. From the fact
that Luther simply called his Large Catechism "German
Catechism" one may infer that he began work on this
first, and that, when writing the title, he had not yet
begun the Small Catechism nor planned it definitely;
but not, that Luther completed the Large Catechism
first. On the other hand, from the title "Small
Catechism" one can only infer that Luther, when he
wrote thus, had already begun to write, and was working
on, the Large Catechism, but not, that the Small
Catechism appeared later than the large. Albrecht:"One
may certainly speak of a small book before the appearance
of a large book of similar kind, if the latter has been
definitely planned, worked out at the same time, and is
almost completed." (W. 30, 1, 569.)

#### 100. Tables Published First.

January 15, 1529, Luther wrote to Martin Goerlitz:
"Modo in parando catechismo pro rudibus paganis versor.
I am now busy preparing the Catechism for the
ignorant heathen" (not "peasants," for in his German
Order of Worship, Luther says: "Catechism is an
instruction by means of which heathen who desire to
become Christians are taught"). It was formerly asserted
that the expression "pro rudibus paganis" showed
that Luther here meant the Small Catechism.Appealing
to the statement in the Preface to the Large Catechism:
"This sermon is designed and undertaken that it might
be an instruction for children and the simple-minded,"
Koellner was the first one to assert that Luther's phrase
of January 15 referred to the Large Catechism. In this he
was followed by Cohrs, Enders, and others. (Enders, 7,
44.) However, according to the usage of the word catechism
described above, the statement quoted does not
preclude that Luther, when writing thus, was engaged
on both Catechisms.And such indeed was the case. For
on January 20, 1529, Roerer, the Wittenberg proofreader,
wrote to Roth:"Nothing new has appeared. I believe
that the Catechism as preached by D. M. for the unlettered
and simple will be published for the coming
Frankfurt mass. Yet, while writing this, I glance at the
wall of my dwelling, and fixed to the wall I behold tables
embracing in shortest and simplest form Luther's
Catechism for children and the household, and forthwith
I send them to you as a sample, so that by the same
messenger they may be brought to you immediately.
Iam novi nihil in lucem prodiit; ad nundinas credo
Francofurdenses futuras Catechismus per D. M. praedicatus
pro rudibus et simplicibus edetur. Hoc vero scribens
inspicio parietem aestuarioli mei, affixas parieti video
tabulas complecententes brevissime simul et crasse catechismum
Lutheri pro pueris et familia, statim mitto pro
exemplari, ut eodem tabellario iam ad te perferantur."
(W. 30, I, 428; Enders, 7, 44.)

This letter of January 20 is the first time that both
of Luther's Catechisms are mentioned together and distinguished
from each other.By catechism Roerer means
the text of the five chief parts which Luther put at the
head of his Large Catechism. "Catechismus per D. M.
praedicatus" designates the explanation of this text as
comprised in Luther's three series of sermons of 1528
and summed up in the Large Catechism. From this
preached and later on so-called Large Catechism, which
appeared in April, entitled "German Catechism,"Roerer
distinguishes "tables, summing up Luther's Catechism
in shortest and simplest form for children and the
household." He means the series of charts containing
the first three chief parts, which Luther considered the
Catechism par excellence. And at the time when Roerer
spoke of the prospective publication of the Large
Catechism for the Frankfurt mass, these tables were
already hanging on his wall.

Albrecht comments: "For the moment Roerer had
not remembered the very interesting novelty, which had
already appeared in the first tables of the later so-called
Small Catechism. However, a glance at the wall of his
room reminded him of it.And from a letter of his dated
March 16 we must infer that they were the three charts
containing the Ten Commandments,the Creed, and the
Lord's Prayer with Luther's explanation. These he calls
．tables which in shortest and simplest form embrace
Luther's Catechism for the children and the household,'
Thus he wrote in view of the superscription: ．As the
head of the family should teach them in a simple way to
his household,' without implying a difference between
the expression pro pueris et familia and the preceding
pro rudibus et simplicibus, since the former are included
in the latter. The difference between the two works is
rather indicated by the words brevissime simul et crasse.
But at the same time their inner connection is asserted,
for by sending the tables pro exemplari, he characterizes
them as a model or sample of Luther's manner of treating
the Catechism. They are the catechismus Lutheri,
that is, the aforementioned catechismus per D. M. praedicatus
in its shortest form and draft (conceived as an
extract of the sermons or of the Large Catechism). He
thought that this sample would indicate what was to be
expected from the forthcoming larger work." (W. 30, 1,
429.)

When, therefore, Luther wrote on January 15:
"Modo in parando catechismo pro rudibus paganis versor,"
he was engaged on both Catechisms, and had proceeded
far enough to enable him to send the first tables
of the Small Catechism to the printer. Buchwald
remarks regarding the letter of January 20 that Roerer
probably had just received the tables from the press.
However, Roerer's letter to Roth of February 12, 1529,
shows that already about a month ago he had sent the
"tables of the Catechism" (evidently the same to which
he referred January 20) to Spalatin. Accordingly, these
tables were forwarded about January 12. The following
remark in the Church Order for Schoenewald in the
district of Schweinitz: "First to pronounce for the people
the Ten Commandments, the Creed and the Lord's
Prayer, thereupon to explain them in the most simple
way, as published [each] on a printed table," takes us
back still a few days more. For the visitation in the district
of Schweinitz, in which Luther took part, was held
January 7 to 9, the time from which also the
Schoenewald Church Order dates. At this visitation,
therefore, even prior to January 7, Luther himself distributed
the first series of tables, comprising the first
three chief parts, of his Small Catechism. Cohrs opines
that Luther sent this series to the printer about
Christmas 1528 at the latest. However, it does not
appear why the printing should have consumed three to
four weeks Seb. Froeschels however, is mistaken when
he declares in his book on the Priesthood of Christ,
1565, that, at a table conversation of 1528, Luther had
advised Hans Metsch constantly to have with him a
good small catechism, such as the one he had written.
Knaake surmises that 1528 is a misprint; it should be
1538. (W. 30, 1, 430f.)

#### 101.Completion of Catechisms Delayed.

It was almost two months after the first table-series
had appeared before the second was published. This
delay is accounted for by Luther's illness and his being
burdened with other work, especially with his book
against the Turk.March 3 he wrote to Hausmann: "By
reason of Satan's afflictions I am almost constantly
compelled to be a sick well man (als Gesunder krank zu
sein), hence I am much hindered in writing and other
work." (Enders, 7, 61.) However, in the same letter
Luther informed his impatiently waiting friend: "The
Catechism is not completed,my dear Hausmann, but it
will be completed shortly." Enders remarks that this
refers to the Large Catechism. However, it harmonizes
best with Luther's usage and with the facts if the words
are understood as referring to both Catechisms.
"Shortly," Luther had written, and on March 16 Roerer,
according to his letter of this date, forwarded "the tables
of Confession, the German Litany, the tables of the
Sacrament of Baptism and of the blood of Christ."
Roerer calls them a novelty, recens excussa, recently
printed, from which it appears that the tabulae catechismum
Lutheri brevissime simul et crasse complectentes, to
which he referred on January 20, did not contain the
Sacraments. Thus, then, the five chief parts, Decalog,
Creed, Lord's Prayer, Baptism, and Lord's Supper were
completed by March 16, 1529. Buchwald and Cohrs
surmise, but without further ground for their assumption,
that the table with the Benedicite and the Gratias
was issued together with the first series in January. At
the latest, however, the prayers appeared with the second
series. For March 7, 1529, Levin Metzsch wrote to
Roth, evidently referring to Luther's tables: "I am herewith
also sending to you the Benedicite and the Gratias,
also the Morning and Evening Prayers, together with
the Vice of Drunkenness." (W. 30, 1, 432.) The exact
time when Luther composed the Table of Duties is not
known. And the first evidence we have of the Small
Catechism's appearing in book form is Roerer's letter of
May 16, 1529, saying that he is sending two copies of the
Small Catechism, the price of which, together with
other books, is two groschen. (432.) The necessary data
are lacking to determine how long Luther's manuscript
was ready before it was printed, and before the printed
copies were distributed.

As to the large Catechism, it was not completed
when the second table series appeared in March. In a
letter, the date of which must probably be fixed about
the end of March, Roerer says: "The Turk is not yet
entirely struck off; neither the Catechism." April 23,
however, the Large Catechism was on the market, for on
this day Roerer wrote: "I am sending three copies of the
Catechism." It was the Large Catechism; for the price of
each copy was two groschen, whereas on May 16, 1529,
Roerer had sent two copies of the Small Catechism and
other books for two groschen. (432.) The Large
Catechism probably had appeared several weeks before
April 23. Albrecht: "Even if all [of Luther's] sermons
from Palm Sunday to Maundy Thursday, 1529, are considered
preliminary works, according to which the last
paragraphs of the Large Catechism were elaborated,we
can assume that its appearance in the beginning or the
first half of April, 1529, was possible. To be sure, the
printing must then have been advanced so far before
Holy Week that the rest could be finished speedily on
the basis of the manuscript delivered immediately after
the sermons of Monday and Maundy Thursday had
been preached."

This theory fits in with the facts that John Lonicer
ofMarburg had already completed his Latin translation
on May 15, 1529 (although, according to the title-page,
it first appeared in September), and that Roerer in a letter
of April 23 merely mentions the Large Catechism in
passing,without designating it as an important novelty.
Stephen Roth, the recipient of the letter, spent some
time at Wittenberg during April, and probably purchased
his first copy there; so Roerer refers to copies
which were ordered subsequently. (482.)
While thus the Small Catechism in chart form was
completed and published before the Large Catechism,
the former succeeded the latter in book form.However,
though completed after the Small Catechism, it can be
shown that the beginning and perhaps even part of the
printing of the Large Catechism dates back to 1528, thus
preceding in this respect even the Charts of January 9. If
the short Preface to the Large Catechism, as well as the
exhortation at the beginning:"Let the young people also
come to the preaching, that they hear it explained and
learn to understand it," etc., had been written after the
9th of January, Luther would probably have mentioned
the Tables, just as he refers to the Large Catechism in the
Preface to the Small Catechism, which was written
about the end of April or the beginning of May. (535,
17.) Since, however, Luther makes no such indication,
these paragraphs of the Large Catechism were, no
doubt, composed before January, 1529. (575,1; 579, 26.)
The same inference may be drawn from the fact that, in
the explanation of the First Commandment, the wording
of the conclusion of the Ten Commandments
shows a number of variations from its wording in the
Small Catechism, whereas its wording at the close of the
explanation of the commandments is in conformity
with it. (589, 30; 672, 320.)

#### 102. Similarity and Purpose of Catechisms.

As great as is the dissimilarity between Luther's two
Catechisms, on the one hand, so great, on the other, is
the similarity. If one did not know that the Large
Catechism was begun before the Small, and that both
originated in the sermons of 1528, he might either view
the Large Catechism as a subsequent expansion of the
Small, or the latter as a summary of the former.Yet neither
the one nor the other is the case. If the Large
Catechism influenced the Small, so also the latter the
former. Albrecht says: "It is more probable that the
Small Catechism influenced the Large Catechism than
vice versa." (W. 30, 1, 558.) At all events, the second
table-series could not have been extracted from the
Large Catechism as such, since the latter was only completed
after March 25, whereas these tables were published
already on March 16. The Small Catechism has
been characterized as "a small basketful of ripe fruit
gathered from that tree" [the Large Catechism]. In substance
that is true, since both originate from the same
source, the sermons of 1528. Already Roerer calls attention
to this similarity, when in the aforementioned letter,
he designates the Large Catechism as "Catechismus
per D. M. praedicatus," and then describes the Small
Catechism as "tabulae complectentes brevisissime simul et
crasse catechismum Lutheri pro pueris et familia." Both
treat of the same five chief parts; the explanation of both
presupposes the knowledge of the text of these parts,
both owe their origin to the doctrinal ignorance,uncovered
particularly in the Saxon visitation; and the purpose
of both is the instruction of the plain people and
the young. Indeed, it was not for scholars, but for the
people that Luther lived, labored, and contended."For,"
says he in his German Mass, "the paramount thing is to
teach and lead the people." (W. 19, 97.)

Above all, Luther endeavored to acquaint the "dear
youth"with the saving truths, not merely for their own
sakes, but in the interest of future generations as well.
He desired to make them mature Christians, able to
confess their faith and to impart instruction to their
children later on. In particular, the two Catechisms were
to serve the purpose of properly preparing the children
and the unlearned for the Holy Eucharist, as appears
from the Preface to the Small Catechism and from the
last paragraphs of the Large (536, 21ff.; 760, 39ff.); for
both end in admonitions diligently to partake of the
Lord's Supper. The Sacrament of the Altar, in Luther's
estimation, is the goal of all catechetical instruction. For
this reason he added to the ancient chief parts those of
Baptism, Confession, and the Lord's Supper.

Accordingly, both Catechisms, though in various
respects, are intended for all: people, youth, parents,
preachers, and teachers. It is not correct to say that
Luther wrote his Large Catechism only for scholars, and
the other only for the unlearned.He desired to instruct
all, and, at the same time, enable parents and pastors to
teach. According to Luther, it is the duty of every
Christian to learn constantly, in order also to be able to
teach others in turn. If any one, said he, really no longer
needed the Catechism for himself, he should study it
nevertheless for the sake of the ignorant.Nor did Luther
exempt himself from such study. In the Long Preface to
the Large Catechism we read: "But for myself I say this:
I am also a doctor and preacher, yea, as learned and
experienced as all those may be who have such presumption
and security; yet I do as a child who is being
taught the Catechism, and every morning, and whenever
I have time, I read and say, word for word the Ten
Commandments, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the
Psalms, etc.And I must still read and study daily, and yet
I cannot master it as I wish, but must remain a child and
pupil of the Catechism, and am glad so to remain."(569,
7.)

April 18, 1530, Luther repeated this in a sermon as
follows: "Whoever is able to read, let him, in the morning,
take a psalm or some other chapter in the Bible and
study it for a while. For that is what I do.When I rise in
the morning, I pray the Ten Commandments, the
Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and also a psalm with the children.
I do so because I wish to remain familiar with it,
and not have it overgrown with mildew, so that I know
it." (W. 32, 65.) In a sermon of November 27, of the
same year, Luther warns: "Beware lest you become presumptuous,
as though, because you have heard it often,
you knew enough of the Catechism. For this knowledge
ever desires us to be its students.We shall never finish
learning it, since it does not consist in speech, but in life
... For I also,D. M., doctor and preacher, am compelled
day by day to pray and to recite the words of the
Decalog, the Symbol, and the Lord's Prayer as children
are wont to do. Hence you need not be ashamed; for
much fruit will result." (209.)

#### 103. Particular Purpose of Large Catechism.

In his sermons of 1529 Luther declared repeatedly
that his purpose was to instruct the plain people and the
children in those things which he regarded as the minimum
every Christian ought to know. (30, 1, 2. 27. 57.)
And he did not abandon this purpose when he condensed
his sermons into the Large Catechism.
Accordingly, he begins it with the words: "This sermon
is designed and undertaken that it might be an instruction
for children and the simple-minded." (575, 1.)
Again: "For the reason, why we exercise such diligence
in preaching the Catechism so often is that it may be
inculcated on our youth, not in a high and subtile manner,
but briefly and with the greatest simplicity, so as to
enter the mind readily and be fixed in the memory."
(581, 27.) Hence Roerer also characterized the Large
Catechism as "Catechismus per D. M. praedicatus pro
rudibus et simplicibus." Many expressions of the Large
Catechism also point to the fact that everything was
here intended for the young and the common people.
For example:"All this I say that it may be well impressed
upon the young." (621, 140.) "But now for young scholars
let it suffice to indicate the most necessary points."
(681, 12.) "But to explain all these single points separately
belongs not to brief sermons for children, but
rather to the ampler sermons that extend throughout
the entire year." (687, 32.) Thus Luther aimed to serve
the people and the children also by his Large Catechism.
Not, indeed, that it was to be given into the hands of the
children (the Sm justification. Indeed, also
___________________________teachers, and parents
were to use it with a view to teaching them by example
how to expound the articles of the Christian doctrine
for the simple-minded.

In particular, the Large Catechism was to enable the
less educated pastors in the villages and in the country
to do justice to their sacred duty.The instructions of the
visitors called for regular Catechism-sermons. For this
purpose Luther sought to furnish the preachers with
material. From the Large Catechism they were to learn
how to deliver simple, plain sermons on the five chief
parts. In the longer Preface Luther therefore directs his
admonition "to all Christians, but especially to all pastors
and preachers, that they should daily exercise themselves
in the Catechism, which is a short summary and
epitome of the entire Holy Scriptures, and that they
may always teach the same."And why? Luther explains:
"We have no slight reasons for treating the Catechism so
constantly, and for both desiring and beseeching others
to teach it, since we see to our sorrow that many pastors
and preachers are very negligent in this, and slight both
their office and this teaching; some from great and high
art, but others from sheer laziness and care for their
paunches," etc. (567.)

Ministers, according to Luther, were to study the
Catechism for their own instruction and edification as
well as in the interest of their office.Hence he concludes
his Preface, saying: "Therefore I again implore all
Christians, especially pastors and preachers, not to be
doctors too soon, and imagine that they know everything
(for imagination and cloth unshrunk fall far short
of the measure), but that they daily exercise themselves
well in these studies and constantly treat them; moreover,
that they guard with all care and diligence against
the poisonous infection of such security and vain imagination,
but steadily keep on reading, teaching, learning,
pondering, and meditating, and do not cease until they
have made a test and are sure that they have taught the
devil to death, and have become more learned than God
Himself and all His saints." (573, 19; 535, 17.)
From the Large Catechism, therefore, pastors were
to learn how to preach the fundamental Christian
truths."To be sure," says Albrecht,"Luther did not make
it as easy for the pastors as was later done by Osiander
and Sleupner in the Nuernberg Children's Sermons,
where the individual sermons are exactly marked off,
the form of address to the children is retained, and, in
each instance, a short explanation, to be memorized, is
added to the longer explanation."(W. 30, 1,478.)--That
it was Luther's purpose to have his Large Catechism
serve also parents appears from the instructions at the
beginning and the end of it. (573, 17; 772, 87.)

#### 104. Special Purpose of Small Catechism.

The Large Catechism was to serve all; the same
applies to the Small Catechism.But above all it was to be
placed into the hands of the children, who were to use
and to memorize it at home, and to bring it with them
for instruction in the church. Buchwald and Cohrs surmise
that Luther published the second table series during
Lent with special reference to "grown people."
However, Luther was accustomed to direct his admonition
to partake of the Lord's Supper diligently also to
children, and that, too, to children of comparatively tender
years. In his sermon of March 25, 1529, he says:
"This exhortation ought not only to move us older
ones, but also the young and the children. Therefore
you parents ought to instruct and educate them in the
doctrine of the Lord: the Decalog, the Creed, the Prayer,
and the Sacraments. Such children ought also to be
admitted to the Table that they may be partakers" [of
the Lord's Supper]. (W. 30, 1, 233.) In his sermon of
December 19, 1528, we read: "Hence, you parents and
heads of families, invite your subordinates to this
Sacrament, and we shall demand an account of you if
you neglect it. If you will not go yourselves, let the young
go; we are much concerned about them. When they
come, we shall learn, by examining them how you
instruct them in the Word as prescribed. Hence, do
come more frequently to the Sacrament, and also
admonish your children to do so when they have
reached the age of discretion. For in this way we want to
learn who are Christians, and who not. If you will not
do so, we shall speak to you on the subject. For even
though you older people insist on going to the devil,we
shall still inquire about your children. Necessity:
because sin, the devil, and death are ever present.
Benefit: because the remission of sins and the Holy
Spirit are received." (121f.) The tender age at which the
young were held to partake of the Lord's Supper
appears from Bugenhagen's preface to the Danish edition
of the Enchiridion of 1538,where he says "that after
this confession is made, also the little children of about
eight years or less should be admitted to the table of
Him who says: ．Suffer the little children to come unto
Me,' "(433.) The conjecture, therefore, that the tables of
Confession and the Sacraments were not intended for
children, but specifically for adults, is without foundation.
In all its parts the Small Catechism was intended to
serve the children .

When the first table appeared, it bore the superscription:
"The Ten Commandments, as the head of the
family should teach them in a simple way to his household."
Similar to this were the titles of the remaining
charts. And these superscriptions were permitted to
stand when Luther published the Enchiridion in book
form. The book edition, therefore, as well as the chart
edition, was to render services also to parents, who were
to take upon themselves a large part of the work in
teaching the young. But how were they to do it, in view
of the fact that many of them did not know the
Catechism themselves? This had occurred also to
Luther. He realized that, besides the Large Catechism,
parents were in need of a text-book containing questions
and answers, adapted for catechizing the children
on the meaning of each part of the Catechism. This, too,
was the reason why the Small Catechism was rapidly
completed before the Large, which had been begun first.
Luther intended parents to use it first of all for their own
instruction and edification, but also for the purpose of
enabling them to discharge their duty by their children
and household.

#### 105. Small Catechism Intended Also for Pastors.

That Luther intended his Small Catechism as a help
also for pastors was, in so many words, stated on the
title-page of the first book edition. For, surprising as it
may seem, here he mentions neither the parents nor the
children, but solely the "ordinary pastors and preachers."
The Preface also is addressed to "all faithful, pious
pastors and preachers," and it shows in detail how they
were to make use of the book. Evidently, then, the book
edition was intended to render special services also to
preachers. The reason, however, was not, as has been
surmised, because it embodied the booklet on Marriage
(the booklet on Baptism was added in the second edition);
for the Preface, which is addressed to the preachers,
does not even mention it. The pastors, moreover,
were especially designated on the title-page as the recipients
of the Enchiridion, inasmuch as they were to
employ it in their religious instruction and catechetical
sermons, in order to imbue the young with its contents.
The expression "ordinary pastors and preachers"
referred primarily to the plain preachers in the villages,
where no properly regulated school system existed, and
where, at best, the sexton might assist the pastor in seeing
to it that the Catechism was memorized. Albrecht:
"When Luther prepared both Catechisms at the same
time and with reference to each other, he evidently
desired their simultaneous use, especially on the part of
the plain pastors, who in the Small Catechism possessed
the leading thoughts which were to be memorized, and
in the Large Catechism their clear and popular explanation."
(W. 30, 1, 548.)

Luther's intention was to make the Small
Catechism the basis of instruction in the church as well
as in the homes; for uniform instruction was required
to insure results. Having, therefore, placed the
Catechism into the hands of the parents, Luther could
but urge that it be introduced in the churches, too. He
also showed them how to use it. On June 11, 1529, for
instance, he expounded the First Article after he had
read the text and the explanation of the Small
Catechism. (549.) This the pastors were to imitate, a
plan which was also carried out. The charts were suspended
in the churches; the people and children were
wont to bring the book edition with them to church; the
preachers read the text, expounded it, and had it recited.
The Schoenewald Church Order prescribed that the
pastor "first pronounce for the people" the text of the
chief parts, and then expound it as on Luther's charts.
(549.)

#### 106. A Book Also for Schools and Teachers.

When planning and writing his Small Catechism,
Luther self-evidently did not overlook the schools and
the schoolteachers. The first booklet of the charts for the
Latin schools of the Middle Ages contained the abc; the
second, the first reading-material, viz., the Paternoster,
Ave Maria, and the Credo; the third, the Benedicite,
Gratias, and similar prayers. Albrecht writes: "We may
surmise that Luther, when composing the German
tables and combining them in a book, had in mind the
old chart-booklets. This view is supported by the fact
that in it he embodied the prayers, the Benedicite and
Gratias, and probably also by the title Enchiridion,
which, besides the titles ．Handbooklet' or ．The
Children's Handbooklet' was applied to such elementary
books." (W. 30, 1, 546.) In the Instruction for the
Visitors we read: "A certain day, either Saturday or
Wednesday, shall be set aside for imparting to the children
Christian instruction ... Hereupon the schoolteacher
shall simply and correctly expound at one time
the Lord's Prayer, at another the Creed, at another the
Ten Commandments, etc." (W. 26, 238.) In these
schools Luther's Small Catechism served as text-book;.
From 1529 until the beginning of the eighteenth century
Sauermann's Latin translation (Parvus Catechismus
pro Pueris in Schola) was employed in the Latin schools
of Saxony. In the German schools the German
Enchiridion was used as the First Reader. Hence, the
Marburg reprint of the first Wittenberg edition of the
Catechism begins with the alphabet, and makes it a
point to mention this fact on its title-page.

Down to the present day no other book has
become and remained a schoolbook for religious
instruction to such an extent as Luther's Small
Catechism. And rightly so; for even Bible History must
be regarded as subordinate to it. The assertion of modern
educators that instruction in Bible History must
precede instruction in Luther's Catechism rests on the
false assumption that Luther's Catechism teaches doctrines
only. But the truth is that it contains all the essential
facts of salvation as well, though in briefest form, as
appears particularly from the Second Article, which
enumerates historical facts only.The Small Catechism is
"the Laymen's Bible, der Laien Biblia," as Luther called it
in a sermon of September 14, 1528, an expression
adopted also by the Formula of Concord. (777, 5.)

Luther's Enchiridion presents both the facts of salvation
and their divine interpretation. The picture for which
the Small Catechism furnishes the frame is Christ, the
historical Christ, as glorified by the Holy Spirit particularly
in the writings of the Apostle Paul. In the Lutheran
Church the Small Catechism, therefore, deserves to be
and always to remain what it became from the first
moment of its publication: the book of religious
instruction for home, school, and church; for parents,
children, teachers, and preachers, just as Luther had
planned and desired.

#### 107. Titles of Large Catechism.

"Deutsche Katechismus, German Catechism," was
the title under which the Large Catechism first
appeared, and which Luther never changed. In the
Preface to the Small Catechism he used the expression
"Large Catechism," having in mind his own Catechism,
though not exclusively, as the context shows. (535, 17.)
Yet this was the natural title since the shorter Catechism
was from the beginning known as the "Small
Catechism."And before long it was universally in vogue.
The Church Order for Brueck, of 1530, designates the
Large Catechism as "the Long Catechism." In the catalog
of his writings of 1533, which Luther prefaced, but
did not compile, it is called "Large Catechism,
Catechismus Gross." Likewise in the Corpus Doctrinae
Pomeranicum. The Articles of the Visitors in Meiszen,
1533, first employed the designation "The Large and
Small Catechisms." The Church Order for Gera of the
same year also distinguishes:"The Large Catechism and
the Small Catechism."The Eisfeld Order of 1554 distinguishes:
"The Small Catechism of Luther" and "The
Large Catechism of Luther." In his treatise on the Large
Catechism of 1541, Spangenberg first employed the
new form as a title: "The Large Catechism and
Children's Instruction of Dr.M. Luther."

The title of the Low German edition of 1541 runs:
"De Grote Katechismus Duedesch." The Latin translation
by Obsopoeus of 1544 is entitled "Catechismus
Maior." The Index of the Wittenberg complete edition
of Luther's Works of 1553 has "Der grosse
Katechismus," while the Catechism itself still bears the
original title, "Deutscher Katechismus." The Jena edition
of 1556 also has the original title, but paraphrases
in the Index: "Zweierlei Vorrede gross und klein, D. M. L,
auf den Katechismum, von ihm gepredigt Anno 1529.
Two Prefaces, large and small, of Dr. M. L. to the
Catechism, preached by him in the year 1529." Since
1570, the Corpora Doctrinae give the title, "The Large
Catechism, German. Der Grosse Katechismus, deutsch."
So also the Book of Concord of 1580. In the Leipzig edition
and in Walch's the word "deutsch" is omitted. (W.
30, 1, 474f.)

"German Catechism," corresponding to the title
"German Mass,"means German preaching for children,
German instruction in the fundamental doctrines of
Christianity. Luther wrote "German Mass" in order to
distinguish it from the Latin, which was retained for
many years at Wittenberg beside the German service
(this is also what Wolfgang Musculus meant when he
reported in 1536 that in Wittenberg services were conducted
predominantly in papistic fashion, ad morem
papisticum). So also "German Catechism" is in contrast
to the Latin instruction in the churches and especially in
the schools. Concerning the latter we read, e.g., in the
instruction of the visitors: "The boys shall also be
induced to speak Latin, and the schoolteachers shall, as
far as possible, speak nothing but Latin with them." (26,
240.) Ever since the early part of the Middle Ages the
Latin Credo, Paternoster, etc., had been regarded and
memorized as sacred formulas, the vernacular being
permitted only rarely, and reluctantly at that. Also in the
Lutheran Church the Latin language was not immediately
abolished. A number of Evangelical catechisms,
antedating Luther's,were written in, and presuppose the
use of, the Latin language, for example,Melanchthon's
Enchiridion, Urerius's Paedagogia, Agricola's Elementa
Pietatis, etc. The Brunswick Liturgy of 1528, drafted by
Bugenhagen, prescribed that on Saturday evening and
early on Sunday morning the chief parts of the
Catechism be read in Latin in the churches "on both galleries,
slowly, without chanting (sine tono), alternately
(ummeschicht)." The Wittenberg Liturgy provided:
"Before the early sermon on Sundays or on festival-days
the boys in the choir, on both sides, shall read the entire
Catechism in Latin, verse by verse, without ornamental
tone (sine tono distincto)." (477.) Accordingly, when
Luther began to preach on the chief parts in German,he
was said to conduct "German Catechism." And since
German services with German instruction were instituted
by Luther in the interest of the unlearned and
such as were unable to attend the Latin schools, the term
"German Catechism" was equivalent to popular
instruction in religion. That Luther's Catechism, also in
point of racy language, was German to the core, appears
from the frequent use of German words and expressions
which, in part, have since become obsolete.
(Mueller, Symb. Buecher, 857--860.)

#### 108. Editions of Large Catechism.

The first edition (quarto) of the Large Catechism,
of which Roerer forwarded copies on April 23, 1529,
contains, as text, the Commandments, the Creed, the
Lord's Prayer, and the words of institution of the
Sacraments. The text is preceded by a Brief Preface,
which, however, Luther, considering it a part of the
Catechism, did not designate and superscribe as such.
Some instructions and admonitions are inserted
between the Catechism-text, which is followed by the
detailed explanation. Such is the form in which the
Large Catechism first appeared, and which, in the main,
it also retained. The second edition (also in quarto and
from the year 1529) reveals numerous textual corrections
and adds a longer section to the Lord's Prayer, viz.,
paragraphs 9 to 11: "at the risk of God's wrath.... seek
His grace." (699.) This addition, though not found in
the German Book of Concord of 1580, was received
into the official Latin Concordia of 1584. Furthermore,
the second edition of 1529 adds the "Short Admonition
to Confession;"hence the sub-title: "Increased by a New
Instruction and Admonition to Confession."This addition,
however, was embodied in neither the German nor
the Latin Concordia. In the Seventh Commandment
the second edition of 1529 omits the words "with
whom [arch-thieves] lords and princes keep company"
(644, 230), which, according to Albrecht, was due to a
timid proof-reader. Numerous marginal notes, briefly
summarizing the contents, were also added to this edition
and retained in the Latin Concordia of 1584.
Furthermore, it contained 24 woodcuts, the first three
of which were already used in Melanchthon's fragmentary
Catechism sermons of 1528, for which book probably
also the remaining cuts were originally intended.
Albrecht remarks:"Let it remain undecided whether the
cuts, which Melanchthon probably was first to select for
his catechism sermons of 1528, were received into the
edition of 1529 (which Luther corrected) upon a suggestion
of the printer Rhau, or Bugenhagen, or Luther
himself ." (W. 30, 1, 493.)

Two Latin as well as a Low German translation (by
Bugenhagen) also appeared in 1529. The Low German
edition, printed by Rhau, seems to have paved the way
in using the aforementioned pictures. Of the Latin
translations, one was prepared by Lonicer and printed
at Marburg, while the other, by Vicentius Obsopoeus,
rector of the school at Ansbach, was printed at
Hagenau. After making some changes, which were not
always improvements, Selneccer embodied the latter in
the Latin Concordia, adding the longer Preface from the
Frankfurt edition of 1544. In the Large Catechism this
new Preface is found for the first time in Rhau's quarto
edition of 1530. Literal allusions to Luther's letter of
June 30, 1530, to J. Jonas have given rise to the assumption
that it was written at Castle Coburg. (Enders, 8, 47.
37.) In the Jena edition of Luther's Works, the Dresden
edition of the Book of Concord of 1580, the Magdeburg
edition of 1580, the Heidelberg folio edition of 1582,
and the Latin edition of 1580, this longer Preface follows
the shorter. However, since the shorter Preface forms
part of the Catechism itself, the longer Preface ought to
precede it, as is the case in the official Latin Concordia
of 1584. In the Low German edition of 1531
Bugenhagen defends the expressions, criticized by
some: I believe "an Gott, an Christum" in the Low
German edition of 1529, instead of "in Gott, in
Christum." (W. 30, 1, 493.) In Rhau's edition of 1532
and 1535 the morning and evening prayers are added,
probably only as fillers.The changes in Rhau's edition of
1538, styling itself, "newly corrected and improved,"
consist in linguistic improvements and some additions
and omissions. Albrecht believes that most, but not all,
of these changes were made by Luther himself, and that
the omissions are mostly due to inadvertence.

#### 109. Title of Small Catechism.

Luther seems to have published the chart catechism
of January, 1529, without any special title, though
Roerer, from the very first, calls it a catechism. In the first
Wittenberg book edition, however, one finds inserted,
between the Preface and the Decalog, the superscription:
"Ein kleiner Katechismus oder christliche Zucht. A
Small Catechism or Christian Discipline." This may
have been the title of the charts, since it would hardly
have been introduced for the book edition, where it was
entirely superfluous, the titlepage designating it as "The
Small Catechism for the Ordinary Pastors and
Preachers." Likewise it cannot be proved that the opening
word on the title-page of this first book edition was
"Enchiridion," since this edition has disappeared without
a trace, and the only remaining direct reprint does
not contain the word "Enchiridion."All subsequent editions
however, have it.

The word "Enchiridion" is already found in the
writings ofAugustine, and later became common.In his
Glossary, Du Cange remarks:"This name [Enchiridion]
St. Augustine gave to a most excellent little work on
faith, hope, and charity, which could easily be carried in
the hand, or, rather, ought continually to be so carried,
since it contained the things most necessary for salvation."
(3, 265.) The Erfurt Hymn-Booklet of 1524 was
called "Enchiridion or Handbooklet, very profitable for
every Christian to have with him for constant use and
meditation." In 1531 Luther praised the Psalter, saying:
"It may be called a little Bible, wherein all that is found
in the entire Bible is most beautifully and briefly
summed up and has been made and prepared to be a
splendid Enchiridion, or Handbook." (E. 63, 28.) The
Instruction for Visitors calls the primer "the handbooklet
of the children, containing the alphabet, the Lord's
Prayer, the Creed, and other prayers." In 1523
Melanchthon had published such a book, entitled
"Enchiridion." Thus Enchiridion denotes a book of
pithy brevity, an elementary book. The various Church
Orders employ the word in a similar sense. (W. 30, 1,
540.)

#### 110. Editions of Small Catechism.

At Wittenberg, George Rhau printed the Large
Catechism and Michel Schirlentz the Small Catechism
(the chart impressions of which must be considered the
first edition) . In the Preface to the Small Catechism,
Luther speaks of "these tables" and "the form of these
tables," thus referring to the chief parts, which were
already printed on placards.However, since "table" also
denotes a list, the term could be applied also to the chief
parts in book form. It was nothing new to employ tables
("Zeddeln," i.e., placards printed on one side) in order to
spread the parts of the Catechism in churches, homes,
and schools. In 1518 Luther published his "Ten
Commandments with a brief exposition of their fulfilment
and transgression," on placards. Of the charts of
the Small Catechism only a Low German copy has as yet
been discovered. It contains Luther's Morning and
Evening Prayers, a reduced reproduction of which is
found in the Weimar Edition of Luther's Works. (30, 1,
241.) The book editions soon took their place beside the
charts. It seems (but here the traces are rather indefinable)
that the first three tables were summed up into a
booklet as early as January or February, 1529. At
Hamburg, Bugenhagen published the charts, which he
had received till then, as a booklet, in Low German. It
contained the five chief parts and the Benedicite and
Gratias. Shortly after the first Wittenberg book edition
had reached him Bugenhagen translated the Preface
and had it printed as a supplement.

Shortly after the completion of the Large
Catechism Luther made arrangements to have the
Small Catechism appear in book form.May 16 Roerer
sent two copies of the Catechismus Minor. But, as stated
above, all copies of this edition were completely used
up. The edition has been preserved in three reprints
only, two of which appeared at Erfurt and one at
Marburg.Th.Harnack published the one Erfurt and the
Marburg reprint, and H. Hartung the other Erfurt
reprint in separate facsimile editions. Evidently these
reprints appeared before the second Wittenberg edition
of June, 1529, was known at Erfurt and Marburg. In
estimating their value, however, modern scholars are
not agreed as to whether they represent three direct or
one direct and two indirect reprints. Albrecht is of the
opinion that only one of the three may be looked upon
as a direct reprint. Judging from these reprints, the original
edition was entitled: "Der kleine Katechismus fuer
die gemeinen Pfarrherrn und Prediger. The Small
Catechism for Ordinary Pastors and Preachers." Aside
from the five chief parts, it contained the Preface, the
Morning and Evening Prayers, the Table of Duties, and
the Marriage Booklet. On the other hand, these reprints
omit not only the word Enchiridion, but also the question,"
How can bodily eating and drinking do such great
things?" together with its answer. Now, in case all three
should be direct reprints, the omitted question and
answer evidently were not contained in the first
Wittenberg edition either. On the other hand, if only
one of them is a direct reprint, the mistake must be
charged to the original Wittenberg impression or to the
reprint. That the omission is an error, probably due to
the printer, appears from the fact that the omitted question
and answer were already found on the charts; for
the Hamburg book edition of the charts in Low
German has them, as also Stifel's written copies of the
charts. (W. 30, 1, 573.)

Of the Wittenberg editions which followed the editio
princeps, those of 1529, 1531, and 1542 deserve special
mention. The first appeared under the title:
"Enchiridion. The Small Catechism for the Ordinary
Pastors and Preachers, enlarged and improved." On the
13th of June this edition was completed, for Roerer
reports on this date:"Parvus Catechismus sub iucudem
iam tertio revocatus est et in ista postrema editione
adauctus."(Kolde l. c., 60.) Roerer designates this edition
as the third, probably because two imprints had been
made of the editio princeps. According to a defective
copy, the only one preserved, this edition adds to the
contents of the editio princeps the word Enchiridion in
the title, the Booklet of Baptism, A Brief Form of
Confessing to the Priest, for the Simple, and the Litany.
The fifth chief part has the question: "How can bodily
eating and drinking do such great things?" In the Lord's
Prayer, however, the explanation of the introduction is
still lacking.This emended edition of 1529 furthermore
had the pictures, for the first time as it seems. The booklets
on Marriage and Baptism were retained, as additions,
in all editions of the Small Catechism published
during the life of Luther, and in many later editions as
well. As yet,however, it has not been proved directly that
such was intended and arranged for by Luther himself.

Also in the succeeding editions Luther made various
material and linguistic changes. In the edition of
1531 he omitted the Litany, and for the "Short Form of
Confession"he substituted an instruction in confession,
which he inserted between the fourth and fifth chief
parts, under the caption, "How the Unlearned Shall be
Taught to Confess." The Lord's Prayer was complemented
by the addition of the Introduction and its
explanation, and the number of cuts was increased to
23. This edition of 1531, of which but one copy (found
in the Bodleiana of Oxford) is in existence, shows essentially
the form in which the Enchiridion was henceforth
regularly printed during and after Luther's life. (W. 30,
1, 608.) The editions of 1537 reveal several changes in
language, especially in the Bible-verses, which are made
to conform to Luther's translation. In the edition of
1542 the promise of the Fourth Commandment
appears for the first time, and the Table of Duties is
expanded. The Bible-verses referring to the relation of
congregations to their pastors were added, and the verses
setting forth the relation of subjects to their government
were considerably augmented. Hence the title:
"Newly revised and prepared, aufs neue uebersehen und
zugerichtet." Probably the last edition to appear during
Luther's life was the one of 1543, which, however, was
essentially a reprint of the edition of 1542.

Knaake declared that all the editions which we possess
"must be attributed to the enterprise of the book
dealers," and that one cannot speak of a direct influence
of Luther on any of these editions. In opposition to this
extreme skepticism, Albrecht points out that, for
instance, the insertion of the explanation of the
Introduction to the Lord's Prayer and the new form of
confession, as well as its insertion between Baptism and
the Lord's Supper, could not have taken place "without
the direct cooperation of Luther."

#### 111. Translations and Elaborations of Small Catechism.

Two of the Latin translations of the Small
Catechism date back to 1529. The first was inserted in
the Enchiridion Piarum Precationum, the Latin translation
of Luther's Prayer-Booklet, which appeared toward
the end of August, 1529. Roerer met with great difficulties
in editing the book. August, 1529, he wrote: "You
may not believe me if I tell you how much trouble I am
having with the Latin Prayer-Booklet which is now being
printed. Somebody else, it is true, translated it from
German into Latin, but I spent much more labor in this
work than he did."(W. 30, 1, 588.) We do not know who
the translator was to whom Roerer refers. It certainly
was not Lonicer, the versatile Humanist of Marburg
who at that time had completed the Large Catechism
with a Preface dated May 15, 1529. Kawerau surmises
that it was probably G.Major. Evidently Luther himself
had nothing to do with this translation. This Catechism
is entitled: Simplicissima et Brevissima Catechismi
Expositio. Almost throughout the question form was
abandoned. In 1532 a revised form of this translation
appeared, entitled:Nova Catechismi Brevioris Translatio.
From these facts the theory (advocated also by v.
Zezschwitz and Knaake) has been spun that the Small
Catechism sprang from a still shorter one, which was
not throughout cast in questions and answers, and
offered texts as well as explanations in a briefer form.
This would necessitate the further inference that the
Preface to the Small Catechism was originally written in
Latin. All of these suppositions, however, founder on
the fact that the charts as we have them in the handwriting
of Stifel are in the form of questions and
answers. The Prayer-Booklet discarded the form of
questions and answers, because its object was merely to
reproduce the contents of Luther's Catechism for such
as were unacquainted with German.

The second Latin translation of 1529 was furnished
by John Sauermann, not (as v. Zezschwitz and Cohrs,
1901, in Herzog's R. E., 10, 135, assume) the Canon of
Breslau, who died 1510, but probably Johannes
Sauermann of Bambergen, who matriculated at
Wittenberg in the winter semester of 1518. (W. 30, 1,
601.) Sauermann's translation was intended as a school
edition of the Small Catechism. First came the alphabet,
then followed the texts: Decalog, Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, Baptism, the Lord's Supper. Luther's Preface, the
Litany, and the Booklets of Marriage and Baptism were
omitted as not adapted for school use. The chapter on
Confession, from the second Wittenberg book edition
was inserted between the fourth and fifth chief parts.
The note to the Benedicite was put into the text with the
superscription "Scholion" (instead of the incorrect
"Scholia"of the German edition, found also in the Book
of Concord)."Paedagogus" was substituted for "head of
the family (Hausvater)." The word "Haustafel"
remained untranslated. The words of the Third
Petition, "so uns den Namen Gottes nicht heiligen und
sein Reich nicht kommen lassen wollen," are rendered:
"quae nobis nomen Dei non sanctificent regnumque
eius ad nos pervenire non sinant."

In the Preface, dated September 19, 1529,"
Johannes Sauromannus" writes: "Every one is of the
opinion that it is clearly the best thing from early youth
carefully and diligently to instruct the boys in the principles
of Christian piety. And since I believe that of all
the elementary books of the theologians of this age
none are better adapted for this purpose than those of
Dr.Martin Luther, I have rendered into Latin the booklet
of this man which is called the Small Catechism,
hoping that it might be given to the boys to be learned
as soon as they enter the Latin school."At the same time
Sauermann declares that his translation was published
"by the advice and order (consilio ac iussu) of the author
[Luther] himself." (30, 1, 673.) One cannot doubt,
therefore, that Sauermann's translation received
Luther's approval. And being in entire conformity with
the Instruction for Visitors, of 1528, for the Latin city
schools, the book was soon in general use. In 1556
Michael Neander speaks of it as "the common Latin
version, hitherto used in all schools." (603.) The Latin
Concordia of 1584 contains Sauermann's version,
essentially, though not literally. The Preface, which
Sauermann had not translated, is taken over from the
Prayer-Booklet. The part On Confession was newly
translated from the German edition of the Catechism of
1531. The textual changes which were made in
Sauermann's translation for the Concordia of 1584
"show that he was careful and usually felicitous, and are
partly to be explained as combinations of the first and
second Latin translations." (604.)

When, in 1539, Justus Jonas translated the
Nuernberg Sermons for Children, he made a third Latin
translation of the Small Catechism. He calls it "this my
Latin translation, not carefully finished indeed, but nevertheless
rendered in good faith." (627.) This Latin text
obtained special importance since it was immediately
done into English, Polish, and Icelandic. In 1560 Job
Magdeburg furnished a fourth Latin version.
Concerning the translations into Greek, Hebrew, and
other languages see Weimar Edition of Luther's
Complete Works (10, 1, 718f.)

Among the earliest elaborations of the Small
Catechism was the Catechism of Justus Menius, 1532,
and the Nuernberg Children's Sermons of 1533. Both
exploit Luther's explanations without mentioning his
name. At the same time some changing, abbreviating,
polishing, etc., was done, as Luther's text was considered
difficult to memorize. Albrecht says of Menius's emendations:
"Some of his formal changes are not bad; most
of them, however are unnecessary. The entire book
finally serves the purpose of bringing to light the surpassing
merit of the real Luther-Catechism." (617.) The
same verdict will probably be passed on all the substitute
catechisms which have hitherto appeared. John
Spangenberg's Small Catechism of 1541, which was
widely used, is, as he himself says, composed "from the
Catechism of our beloved father, Dr.Martin, and those
of others." It contains Luther's Catechism mainly as
changed by Menius.The Nuernberg Children's Sermons,
which embodied also the pictures of Luther's Catechism
and received a wide circulation, were written by
Osiander and Sleupner in 1532, and printed at
Nuernberg, 1533. They contain almost complete the
five chief parts of Luther's Small Catechism as concluding
sentences of the individual sermons, but in original
minting, with abbreviations, additions, and other
changes, which, however, are not nearly as marked as
those ofMenius. These changes were also made to facilitate
memorizing. Between Baptism and the Lord's
Supper was found the doctrinal part on the Office of the
Keys, which in this or a similar form was, after Luther's
death, appended to or inserted in, the Small Catechism
as the sixth or fifth chief part, respectively.

#### 112. The Part "Of Confession."

The Small Catechism did not spring from Luther's
mind finished and complete at one sitting.Originally he
considered the first three chief parts as constituting the
Catechism. Before long, however, he added the parts of
Baptism and the Lord's Supper. These five parts are for
the first time mentioned in the German Order of
Worship, and printed together in the Booklet for
Laymen and Children. The Introduction to the Large
Catechism also offers no more.The chart and book editions
added as real parts of the Catechism (the Booklets
of Marriage and of Baptism cannot be viewed as such)
the Benedicite and Gratias, the Morning and Evening
Prayers, the Table of Duties, and Confession. It is the last
of these parts which played a peculiar role in the history
of the Small Catechism. Albrecht writes: "In the textual
history of the Small Catechism,Confession (besides
the Table of Duties) is the most restless and movable
part. In the Low German editions since 1531 and 1534
it is found after the Lord's Supper as a sort of sixth chief
part, In individual instances it is entirely omitted. On
the other hand, in elaborations of the Catechism,
notably in the Nuernberg Catechism-sermons, it is supplanted
by the Office of the Keys, and in later prints also
combined with it or otherwise recast." (W. 30, 1, 607.)

As for Luther, evidently, as soon as he began to
work on the Catechism, he planned to include also a
part on Confession. Among the charts there were
already those which dealt with Confession. In fact,
Luther must have here treated this part at comparative
length. For Roerer reports that the price of the
Confession charts was three pfennige, whereas the price
of the Sacrament charts was two pfennige. Yet nothing
of Confession was embodied in the first book edition of
the Small Catechism. The first edition also of the Large
Catechism had no part treating of Confession. But the
second Wittenberg edition, of 1529 appeared "augmented
with a new instruction and admonition concerning
Confession." Likewise the "augmented and
improved" Small Catechism of 1529, superscribed,
"Enchiridion," contained a "Short Form how the
Unlearned shall Confess to the Priest. Eine kurze Weise
zu beichten fuer die Einfaeltigen, dem Priester." This
Form was not to serve the pastor in admonishing, etc.,
but Christians when going to confession. Possibly it was
one of the charts which Roerer,March 16, mentioned as
novelties. The addition of this part was, no doubt,
caused by Luther himself. This is supported by the fact
that Sauermann's translation, which appeared by
Luther's "advice and order," also contained it.And while
in the German book edition it was found in the
Appendix, following the Booklet on Baptism,
Sauermann inserted it between Baptism and the Lord's
Supper with the superscription: "How schoolmasters
ought in simplest manner to teach their boys a brief
form of confession. Quo pacto paedagogi suos pueros
brevem confitendi rationem simplicissime docere
debeant." Evidently this, too, was done with Luther's
approval (auctoris consilio et iussu). "Thus Luther at
that time already," says Albrecht, "selected this place for
Confession and retained it later on, when [{{< hiddenanchor 1531 >}}1531{{< /hiddenanchor >}} he
furnished another form of confession for the Catechism
which to him seemed more appropriate." The gradual
insertion of a new chief part (of Confession and
Absolution) between Baptism and the Lord's Supper
was therefore entirely according to Luther's mind;
indeed, it had virtually been carried out by him as early
as 1529.

The original part Of Confession, however, was no
catechetical and doctrinal part in the proper sense of the
word, but purely a liturgical formula of Confession,
even the Absolution being omitted. It merely contained
two confessions similar to the forms found in the Book
of Concord, page 552, sections 21 to 23. Hence Luther,
in the edition of 1531, replaced it with a catecheticoliturgical
form entitled,"How the Unlearned Should be
Taught to Confess." It is identical with the one found in
the Book of Concord of 1580, save only that the original
contained the words,"What is Confession? Answer,"
which are omitted in the German Concordia. Luther
placed the part Of Confession between Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, thereby actually making this the fifth and
the Lord's Supper the sixth chief part. And when later
on (for in Luther's editions the chief parts are not numbered)
the figures were added, Confession could but
receive the number 5, and the Lord's Supper, 6. Thus,
then, the sequence of the six parts, as found in the Book
of Concord, was, in a way, chosen by Luther himself.

#### 113. Office of the Keys and Christian Questions.

The three questions on the Office of the Keys in the
fifth chief part form the most important and independent
addition to Luther's Small Catechism. However,
they are not only in complete agreement with Luther's
doctrine of Absolution, but, in substance, also contained
in what he himself offered in the part Of
Confession.For what Luther says in paragraphs 26 to 28
in a liturgical form is expressed and explained in the
three questions on the Office of the Keys in a doctrinal
and catechetical form. Not being formulated by Luther,
however, they were not received into the Book of
Concord. In the Nuernberg Text-Booklet of 1531 they
are placed before Baptism. Thence they were taken over
into the Nuernberg Children's Sermons of 1533 as a substitute
for Luther's form of Confession. Andrew
Osiander, in the draft of his Church Order of 1531, in
the article on "Catechism and the Instruction of
Children," added as sixth to the five chief parts: "Of the
Keys of the Church,or the Power to Bind and to Unbind
from Sins," quoting as Bible-verse the passage: "The
Lord Jesus breathed on His disciples,"etc.Brenz, though
not, as frequently assumed, the author of the Nuernberg
Catechism, also contributed toward introducing and
popularizing this part of the Catechism. In his
Questions of 1535 and 1536, which appeared in the
Appendix to the Latin translation of Luther's Large
Catechism, he offered an original treatment to the Keys
of Heaven, as the sixth chief part, on the basis of Matt.
16, 19; Luke 19, 16; John 20, 22f. Thirty-six years after
the first publication of Luther's Catechisms,Mathesius,
in his Sermons on the Life of Luther, also speaks of six
chief parts of catechetical instruction; but he enumerates
Absolution as the part between Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, hence as the fifth chief part of the
Catechism.

As to the Christian Questions for Those Who
Intend to Go to the Sacrament, it was claimed very early
that Luther was the author. They were first published in
1549, and a number of separate impressions followed.
After 1558 they are usually found in the appendix to the
Small Catechism. The Note, "These questions and
answers," etc., designating Luther as the author, first
appeared in an edition of 1551. Together with this note,
the Questions are found in an undated Wittenberg edition
of the Small Catechism, which appeared about
1560, containing pictures dated 1551. Referring to this
edition, the Wittenberg proof-reader, Christopher
Walther, in a polemical writing (1566) against
Aurifaber, asserted that the Questions were not written
by Luther, but by John Lang of Erfurt (. 1548) The
question at issue has not yet been decided. For while the
contents of the Questions reproduce, from beginning to
end, Luther's thoughts, and the last answers are almost
literally taken from the Large Catechism, we have no
evidence that Luther compiled them; but, on the other
hand, also no convincing proof against this. Claus
Harms and Koellner asserted that Luther is the author
of the Questions, while Kliefoth and Loehe declared it as
probable.--The Introduction to the Ten
Commandments, "I the Lord, thy God," and the
Doxology, at the close of the Lord's Prayer, were added
after Luther's death.

#### 114. The Table of Duties--Haustafel.

The eighth and last chart of the Catechism differed
from the preceding ones in that it was superscribed:
"Table of Duties (Haustafel), Consisting of Certain
Passages of Scripture for Various Holy Orders and
Stations.Whereby These are to be Admonished, as by a
Special Lesson, Regarding Their Office and Service."
The exact time when Luther drew up this Table is not
known. The latest date to which its composition can be
assigned is the end of April or the beginning of May,
1529. It may, however, be questioned whether it was
published at all as a placard. The two groups of passages:
"What the Hearers Owe to Their Pastors," and: "What
Subjects Owe to Their Government," are probably not
from Luther. Following are the grounds supporting this
view: 1. They are not contained in the German editions
but appeared for the first time in the Latin translation.
2. Their superscriptions differ in form from those of the
other groups. 3. They adduce quite a number of Bibleverses,
and repeat some already quoted, e.g., 1 Tim. 2, 1,
Rom. 13, 1. The German Book of Concord omitted
these passages, while the Latin Concordia of 1580 and
1584 embodied them. Albrecht writes: "The Table of
Duties is an original part of the Catechism, bearing a
true Lutheran stamp. But it was old material worked
over, as is the case almost throughout the Small
Catechism." "The oft-repeated assertion, however, that
the Table of Duties was borrowed from the catechism of
the Waldensians or Bohemian Brethren, is not correct.
For this Table is not found in the Catechism of the
Brethren of 1522, with which Luther was acquainted,
but first in Gyrick's Catechism of 1554, in which
Lutheran material is embodied also in other places."(W.
30, 1, 645.)

The confession books of the Middle Ages, however,
which classified sins according to the social estates, and
especially John Gerson's tract (De Modo Vivendi
Omnium Fidelium reprinted at Wittenberg 1513),
which treated of the offices of all sorts of lay-people in
every station of life,may have prompted Luther to draw
up this Table.But, says Albrecht,"it certainly grew under
his hand into something new and characteristic. The
old material is thoroughly shortened, sifted, supplemented,
newly arranged, recast. While Gerson's tract
throughout bears the stamp of the Middle Ages,
Luther's Table of Duties,with its appeal to the Scriptures
alone, its knowledge of what is a ．holy estate,' its teaching
that, as divine ordinances, civil government and the
household (when embraced by the common order of
Christian love) are equally as holy as the priesthood,
reveals the characteristic marks of the Reformer's new
ideal of life, which, rooting in his faith, and opposed to
the hierarchy and monkery of the Middle Ages, as well
as to the fanaticism of the Anabaptists, became of farreaching
importance for the entire moral thought of the
succeeding centuries." (647.)

Grimm's Lexicon defines "Haustafel" as "der
Abschnitt des Katechismus, der ueber die Pflichten des
Hausstandes handelt, that section of the Catechism
which treats of the duties of the household."This verbal
definition, suggested by the term, is too narrow, since
Luther's "Haustafel" is designed "for various holy orders
and estates," magistrates and pastors included. Still, the
term is not on this account inappropriate. Table (Tafel,
tabula) signifies in general a roster, a list, or index of
leading points, with or without reference to the chart
form. And such a table suspended in the home and
employed in the instruction of the home congregation,
is properly termed "Haustafel." Agreeably to this,
Andreas Fabricius, in 1569, called the "Haustafel" a
domestic table of works, tabula operum domestica.
Daniel Kauzmann, in his Handbook (16 sermons on the
Catechism) of 1569, says: "It is called ．Haustafel' of the
Christians because every Christian should daily view it
and call to mind therefrom his calling, as from a table
which portrays and presents to every one what pertains
to him. It teaches all the people who may be in a house
what each one ought to do or to leave undone in his
calling." (642.)

In his Catechismus Lutheri of 1600 Polycarp Leyser
offers the following explanation: "Why are these pas-
sages called a table? Beyond doubt this is due to the fact
that, from of old, good ordinances have been written
and graven on tables. So did God, who prescribed His
Law to the Jews in ten commandments on two tables.
Similarly Solon wrote the laws of Athens on tables. the
Romans also had their law of twelve tables brought
from Athens. And so, when the government to-day
issues certain commands, it is customary to suspend
them on tables, as also princes and lords suspend on
tables their court rules. But why is it called ．Haustafel'
when it also treats of preachers and the government?
The reason for this is given by St. Paul, I Tim. 3, where
he calls the Church a house of the living God. For as the
housefather in a large house summons his servants and
prescribes to each one what he is to do, so God is also
wont to call into certain stations those who have been
received into His house by Holy Baptism, and to prescribe
to them in this table how each one in his calling
shall conduct himself." (641.)

Concerning the purpose of the Table of Duties,
Albrecht remarks: "If I am correct, Luther, by these
additions, would especially inculcate that Christianity,
the essence of which is set forth in the preceding chief
parts,must daily be practised."That is certainly correct,
for the Catechism must not only be learned, but lived.
And the Table of Duties emphasizes the great truth,
brought to light again by Luther, that Christianity does
not consist in any peculiar form of life; as Romish
priests, monks, and nuns held, who separated themselves
from the world outwardly, but that it is essentially
faith of the heart, which, however, is not to flee into
cloisters and solitudes but courageously and cheerfully
to plunge into practical life with its natural forms and
relations as ordained by Creation, there to be tried as
well as glorified. In his Admonition to the Clergy, 1530,
Luther says: "Furthermore, by such abominable doctrine
all truly good works which God appointed and
ordained were despised and utterly set at naught [by the
Papists]. For instance, lord, subject, father, mother, son,
daughter, servant, maid were not regarded as good
works, but were called worldliness, dangerous estates,
and lost works." (W. 30, 2, 291.) The Table of Duties is a
protest against such perverted views. For here Luther
considers not only the calling of preachers and teachers,
but also all those of government and subjects, of fathers,
mothers, and children, of masters and servants, of mistresses
and maids, of employees and employers, as "holy
orders and estates," in which a Christian may live with a
good conscience, and all of which the Catechism is to
permeate with its truths. "Out into the stream of life
with the Catechism you have learned!"Such, then, is the
admonition which, in particular, the Table of Duties
adds to the preceding parts of the Catechism.

#### 115. Symbolical Authority of Catechisms.

The symbolical authority of Luther's Catechisms
must be distinguished from the practical use to which
they were put in church, school, and home. As to his
doctrine, Luther knew it to be the pure truth of the
divine Word. Hence he could not but demand that
every one acknowledge it. Self-evidently this applies also
to the doctrinal contents of the Catechisms. Luther,
however, did not insist that his Catechisms be made the
books of instruction in church, school, and home; he
only desired and counseled it. If for the purpose of
instruction the form of his Small Catechism did not suit
any one, let him, said Luther, choose another. In the
Preface to the Small Catechism he declared: "Hence,
choose whatever form you think best, and adhere to it
forever." Again, "Take the form of these tables or some
other short, fixed form of your choice, and adhere to it
without the change of a single syllable." Self-evidently
Luther is here not speaking of the doctrine of the
Catechism, but of the form to be used for instruction.
And with respect to the latter he makes no demands
whatever.However, the contents of these books and the
name of the author sufficed to procure for them the
widest circulation and the most extensive use.
Everywhere the doors of churches, schools, and homes
were opened to the writings of Luther.

The tables had hardly been published when catechism
instruction already generally was given according
to Luther's Explanation. The church regulations, first in
Saxony, then also in other lands, provided that Luther's
Small Catechism be memorized word for word, and
that preaching be according to the Large Catechism.
The Church Order of Henry the Pious, 1539, declares:
"There shall not be taught a different catechism in every
locality, but one and the same form, as presented by Dr.
Martin Luther at Wittenberg, shall be observed everywhere."
In 1533 the ministers of Allstaedt were ordered
"to preach according to Luther's Large Catechism."
(Kolde, 63.) The authority of the Catechisms grew during
the controversies after Luther's death, when the
faithful Lutherans appealed to the Smalcald Articles and
especially to Luther's Catechisms. The Lueneburg
Articles of 1561 designate them, together with the
Smalcald Articles, as the correct "explication and explanation"
of the true sense of the Augustana. The Corpus
Doctrinae Pomeranicum of 1564 declares that "the sum
of Christian and evangelical doctrine is purely and correctly
contained in Luther's Catechisms." Their authority as a genuinely Lutheran norm of doctrine increased
when the Reformed of Germany, in 1563, made the
Heidelberg Catechism their particular confession.

Like the Smalcald Articles, Luther's Catechisms
achieved their symbolical authority by themselves,
without resolutions of princes estates, and theologians.
The Thorough Declaration of the Formula of Concord is
merely chronicling actual facts when it adopts the
Catechisms for this reason: "because they have been
unanimously approved and received by all churches
adhering to the Augsburg Confession, and have been
publicly used in churches, schools, and homes, and,
moreover, because the Christian doctrine from God's
Word is comprised in them in the most correct and
simple way, and, in like manner, is explained, as far as
necessary for simple laymen." (853, 8.) The Epitome
adds: "And because such matters concern also the laity
and the salvation of their souls, we also confess the
Small and Large Catechisms of Dr. Luther as they are
included in Luther's works, as the Bible of the laity,
wherein everything is comprised which is treated at
greater length in Holy Scripture, and is necessary for a
Christian man to know for his salvation." (777, 5.)

#### 116. Enemies and Friends of Small Catechism.

In recent times liberal German theologians, pastors,
and teachers have endeavored to dislodge Luther's
Small Catechism from its position in church, school,
and home. As a rule, these attacks were made in the
name of pedagogy; the real cause, however, were their
liberal dogmatical views. The form was mentioned and
assailed, but the contents were meant. As a sample of
this hostility we quote the pedagog, philologian, and
historian Dr. Ludwig Gurlitt (Die Zukunft, Vol. 17, No.
6, p. 222):"At the beginning of the sixteenth century,"he
says, "a monk eloped from a cloister and wrote a religious
book of instruction for the German children. At
the time it was a bold innovation, the delight of all freethinkers
and men of progress, of all who desired to serve
the future. This book, which will soon celebrate its five-
[four-]hundredth anniversary, is still the chief book of
instruction for German children. True, its contents
already are so antiquated that parents reject almost
every sentence of it for themselves; true, the man of today
understands its language only with difficulty--
what of it, the children must gulp down the moldy,
musty food. How we would scoff and jeer if a similar
report were made about the school system of China! To
this Lutheran Catechism, which I would best like to see
in state libraries only, are added many antiquated
hymns ofmystical turgidity, which a simple youth, even
with the best will does not know how to use. All outlived!
Faith in the Bible owes its existence only to the
tough power and law of inertia. It is purely mechanical
thinking and speaking which the schoolmaster preaches
to them and pounds into them. We continue thus
because we are too indolent to fight, or because we fear
an enlightened people."

The best refutation of such and similar aspersions
is a reference to the enormous circulation which
Luther's Small Catechism has enjoyed, to its countless
editions, translations, elaborations, and its universal use
in church, school, and home for four centuries. Thirtyseven
years after the publication of Luther's Catechisms,
Mathesius wrote:"Praise God it is said that in our times
over one hundred thousand copies have been printed
and used in great numbers in all kinds of languages in
foreign lands and in all Latin and German schools."And
since then, down to the present day, millions and millions
of hands have been stretched forth to receive
Luther's catechetical classic.While during the last four
centuries hundreds of catechisms have gone under,
Luther's Enchiridion is afloat to-day and is just as seaworthy
as when it was first launched. A person, however,
endowed with an average measure of common sense
will hardly be able to believe that the entire Lutheran
Church has, for four centuries, been so stupid as would
have been the case if men of Dr.Gurlitt's stripe had spoken
only half the truth in their criticisms.

Moreover, the number of detractors disappears in
the great host of friends who down to the present day
have not tired of praising the Catechisms, especially the
Enchiridion. They admire its artistic and perfect form;
its harmonious grouping, as of the petals of a flower, the
melody and rhythm of its language, notably in the
explanation of the Second Article, its clarity, perspicuity,
and popularity; its simplicity, coupled with depth and
richness of thought; the absence of polemics and of theological
terminology, etc. However, with all this and
many other things which have been and might be said
in praise of the Catechism, the feature which made it
what it truly was, a Great Deed of the Reformation, has
not as yet been pointed out. Luther Paulinized,
Evangelicalized, the Catechism by properly setting forth
in his explanations the finis historiae, the blessed meaning
of the great deeds of God, the doctrine
of_____________________________Luther's
Catechism is, in more than one way, conditioned by its
times, but in its kernel, in its doctrine, it contains, as
Albrecht puts it, "timeless, never-aging material. For in
it pulsates the heartbeat of the primitive Christian faith,
as witnessed by the apostles, and experienced anew by
the Reformer." (648.) This, too, is the reason why
Luther's Enchiridion is, indeed, as G. v. Zezschwitz
remarks, "a booklet which a theologian never finishes
learning, and a Christian never finishes living."

#### 117. Evaluation of Small Catechism.

Luther himself reckoned his Catechisms among his
most important books. In his letter to Wolfgang Capito,
July 9, 1537, he writes: "I am quite cold and indifferent
about arranging my books, for, incited by a Saturnine
hunger, I would much rather have them all devoured, eo
quod Saturnina fame percitus magis cuperem eos omnes
devoratos. For none do I acknowledge as really my
books, except perhaps De Servo Arbitrio and the
Catechism." (Enders, 11, 247.) Justus Jonas declares:
"The Catechism is but a small booklet, which can be
purchased for six pfennige but six thousand worlds
could not pay for it." He believed that the Holy Ghost
inspired the blessed Luther to write it.Mathesius says "If
in his career Luther had produced and done no other
good thing than to give his two Catechisms to homes,
schools, and pulpits, the entire world could never sufficiently
thank or repay him for it." J. Fr. Mayer: "Tot res
quot verba. Tot utilitates, quot apices complectens. Pagellis
brevis, sed rerum theologicarum amplitudine incomparabilis.
As many thoughts as words; as many uses as there
are characters in the book. Brief in pages, but incomparable
in amplitude of theological thoughts."
In his dedicatory epistle of 1591, to Chemnitz's
Loci, Polycarp Leyser says: "That sainted man, Martin
Luther, never took greater pains than when he drew up
into a brief sum those prolix expositions which he
taught most energetically in his various books....
Therefore he composed the Short Catechism, which is
more precious than gold or gems, in which the pure
doctrine of the prophets and apostles (prophetica et
apostolica doctrinae puritas) is summed up into one
integral doctrinal body, and set forth in such clear
words that it may justly be considered worthy of the
Canon (for everything has been drawn from the canonical
Scriptures). I can truthfully affirm that this very
small book contains such a wealth of so many and so
great things that, if all faithful preachers of the Gospel
during their entire lives would do nothing else in their
sermons than explain aright to the common people the
secret wisdom of God comprised in those few words
and set forth from the divine Scriptures the solid
ground upon which each word is built they could never
exhaust this immense abyss."

Leopold von Ranke, in his German History of the
Time of the Reformation, 1839, declares:"The Catechism
which Luther published in 1529, and of which he said
that he, old Doctor though he was, prayed it, is as childlike
as it is deep, as comprehensible as it is unfathomable,
simple, and sublime. Blessed is the man who
nourishes his soul with it, who adheres to it! He has
imperishable comfort in every moment: under a thin
shell the kernel of truth, which satisfies the wisest of the
wise."

Loehe, another enthusiastic panegyrist of Luther,
declares: "The Small Lutheran Catechism can be read
and spoken throughout with a praying heart; in short, it
can be prayed.This can be said of no other catechism. It
contains the most definitive doctrine, resisting every
perversion, and still it is not polemical--it exhales the
purest air of peace. In it is expressed the manliest and
most developed knowledge, and yet it admits of the
most blissful contemplation the soul may wish for. It is
a confession of the Church, and of all, the best known,
the most universal, in which God's children most frequently
meet in conscious faith, and still this universal
confession speaks in a most pleasing personal tone.
Warm, hearty, childlike, yet it is so manly, so courageous,
so free the individual confessor speaks here. Of
all the confessions comprised in the Concordia of 1580,
this is the most youthful, the clearest, and the most penetrating
note in the harmonious chime, and, withal, as
rounded and finished as any. One may say that in it the
firmest objectiveness appears in the garb of the most
pleasing subjectiveness."

Schmauk writes: "The Small Catechism is the real
epitome of Lutheranism in the simplest, the most practical,
the most modern and living, and, at the same time,
the most radical form. It steers clear of all obscure historical
allusions; it contains no condemnatory articles, it
is based on the shortest and the oldest of the ecumenical
symbols. It is not a work for theologians, but for
every Lutheran; and it is not nearly as large as the
Augsburg Confession." (Conf. Prin., 696.)

McGiffert says: "In 1529 appeared his [Luther's]
Large and Small Catechisms, the latter containing a
most beautiful summary of Christian faith and duty,
wholly devoid of polemics of every kind, and so simple
and concise as to be easily understood and memorized
by every child. It has formed the basis of the religious
education of German youth ever since. Though preceded
by other catechisms from the pen of this and that
colleague or disciple, it speedily displaced them all, not
simply because of its authorship, but because of its
superlative merit, and has alone maintained itself in
general use. The versatility of the Reformer in adapting
himself with such success to the needs of the young and
immature is no less than extraordinary. Such a little
book as this it is that reveals most clearly the genius of
the man." (Life of Luther, 316.)

O. Albrecht writes: "Reverently adhering to the
churchly tradition and permeating it with the new
understanding of the Gospel, such are the characteristics
of Luther's Catechisms, especially the Small
Catechism." "On every page new and original features
appear beside the traditional elements." "The essential
doctrinal content of the booklet is thoroughly original;
in it Luther offered a carefully digested presentation of
the essence of Christianity, according to his own understanding
as the Reformer, in a manner adapted to the
comprehension of children--a simple, pithy description
of his own personal Christian piety, without
polemics and systematization, but with the convincing
power of experienced truth." (W. 30, 1, 647.)--Similar
testimonies might easily be multiplied and have been
collected and published repeatedly.

The best praise, however, comes from the enemy in
the form of imitation or even verbal appropriation.
Albrecht says: "Old Catholic catechetes, and not the
worst, have not hesitated to draw on Luther's Large
Catechism. If one peruses the widely spread catechism
of the Dominican monk John Dietenberger, of 1537
(reprinted by Maufang in his work on the Catholic
Catechisms of the sixteenth century, 1881), one is frequently
edified and delighted by the diligence with
which, besides older material, Luther's Large and Small
Catechisms, as well as the Nuernberg Catechism-sermons
of 1533, have been exploited "(W. 30, 1, 497.)

#### 118. Literary Merit of Small Catechism.

Moenckeberg remarks: The Small Catechism
betrays "the imperfection of the haste in which it had to
be finished." As a matter of fact, however, Luther, the
master of German, paid much attention also to its language
in order, by pithy brevity and simple, attractive
form, to make its glorious truths the permanent property
of the children and unlearned who memorized it.
In his publication "Zur Sprache und Geschichte des
Kleinen Katechismus Luthers, Concerning the Language
and History of Luther's Small Catechism," 1909, J.
Gillhoff writes: "Here, if ever, arose a master of language,
who expressed the deepest mysteries in sounds
most simple. Here, if ever, there was created in the
German language and spirit, and in brief compass, a
work of art of German prose. If ever the gods blessed a
man to create, consciously or unconsciously, on the soil
of the people and their needs, a perfect work of popular
art in the spirit of the people and in the terms of their
speech, to the weal of the people and their youth
throughout the centuries, it was here. The explanation
of the Second Article is one of the chief creations of the
home art of German poetry. And such it is, not for the
reason that it rises from desert surroundings, drawing
attention to itself alone, but because it sums up and
crowns the character of the book throughout." (16.)

Speaking in particular of the Second Article, Bang,
in 1909, said in his lecture "Luthers Kleiner Katechismus,
ein Kleinod der Volksschule--Luther's Small Catechism,
a Jewel of the Public Schools": "The Catechism is precious
also for the reason that Luther in the explanations
strikes a personal, subjective, confessional note.When at
home I read the text of the Second Article in silence,and
then read Luther's explanation aloud, it seems to me as
if a hymn rushing heavenward arises from the lapidary
record of facts. It is no longer the language of the word,
but of the sound as well.The text reports objectively, like
the language of a Roman, writing tables of law. The
explanation witnesses and confesses subjectively. It is
Christianity transformed into flesh and blood. It sounds
like an oath of allegiance to the flag. In its ravishing tone
we perceive the marching tread of the myriads of
believers of nineteen centuries; we see them moving
onward under the fluttering banner of the cross in war,
victory, and peace. And we, too, by a power which cannot
be expressed in words, are drawn into the great,
blessed experience of our ancestors and champions.
Who would dare to lay his impious hands on this consecrated,
inherited jewel, and rob the coming generations
of it?!" (20.)

