---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: X. The Smalcald War and the Augsburg and Leipzig Interims.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 10
---


#### 119. Bulwark of Peace Removed.

Luther died on the day of Concordia, February 18,
1546. With him peace and concord departed from the
Lutheran Church. His death was everywhere the signal
for action against true Lutheranism on the part of both
its avowed enemies and false brethren. As long as that
hero of faith and prayer was still living, the weight of his
personal influence and authority proved to be a veritable
bulwark of peace and doctrinal purity against the
enemies within as well as without the Church. Though
enemies seeking to devour had been lurking long ago,
the powerful and commanding personality of Luther
had checked all forces making for war from without and
for dissension from within. The Emperor could not be
induced to attack the Lutherans. He knew that they
would stand united and strong as long as the Hero of
the Reformation was in their midst. Nor were the false
brethren able to muster up sufficient courage to come
out into the open and publish their errors while the
voice of the lion was heard.

But no sooner had Luther departed than strife
began its distracting work. War, political as well as theological,
followed in the wake of his death. From the
grave of the fallen hero a double specter began to loom
up. Pope and Emperor now joined hands to crush
Protestantism by brute force as they had planned long
ago. The result was the Smalcald War. The secret enemies
which Lutheranism harbored within its own
bosom began boldly to raise their heads. Revealing their
true colors and coming out in the open with their pernicious
errors, they caused numerous controversies
which spread over all Germany (Saxony, the cradle of
the Reformation, becoming the chief battlefield), and
threatened to undo completely the blessed work of
Luther, to disrupt and disintegrate the Church, or to
pervert it into a unionistic or Reformed sect. Especially
these discreditable internal dissensions were a cause of
deep humiliation and of anxious concern to all loyal
Lutherans. To the Romanists and Reformed; however,
who united in predicting the impending collapse of
Lutheranism, they were a source of malicious and triumphant
scoffing and jeering. A prominent theologian
reported that by 1566 matters had come to such a pass
in Germany that the old Lutheran doctrine was publicly
proclaimed only in relatively few places. In the
Palatinate public thanks were rendered to God in the
churches that also Electoral Saxony was now about to
join them. The Jesuits insisted that, having abandoned
the doctrine of the real presence in the Lord's Supper,
the Lutherans were no longer genuine Lutherans and
hence no more entitled to the privileges guaranteed by
the Peace of Augsburg (1555) . That the final result of
this turmoil, political as well as theological, proved a
blessing to the Lutheran Church must be regarded and
ever gratefully remembered as a special grace and a
remarkable favor of Almighty God.

#### 120. Luther Foretold Coming Distress.

Though fully conscious of the gravity of the political
and theological situation, and convinced that war
and dissensions were bound to come, Luther was at the
same time confident that it would not occur during his
life.With respect to the coming war he said:"With great
earnestness I have asked God, and still pray daily, that
He would thwart their [the Papists'] plan and suffer no
war to come upon Germany during my life. And I am
confident that God surely hears such prayer of mine,
and I know that there will be no war in Germany as long
as I shall live."(St. L. 9, 1856.) In his Commentary on the
Book of Genesis he wrote: "It is a great consolation
when he says (Is. 57, 1) that the righteous are taken away
from the evil to come. Thus we, too, shall die in peace
before misfortune and misery overtake Germany." (St.
L. 1, 1758.)

Luther spoke frequently also of the impending doctrinal
dissensions. As early as 1531 he declared that the
Gospel would abide only a short time. "When the present
pious, true preachers will be dead," said he, "others
will come who will preach and act as it pleases the devil."
(8, 72.) In 1546 he said in a sermon preached at
Wittenberg: "Up to this time you have heard the real,
true Word; now beware of your own thoughts and wisdom.
The devil will kindle the light of reason and lead
you away from the faith, as he did the Anabaptists and
Sacramentarians ... I see clearly that, if God does not
give us faithful preachers and ministers, the devil will
tear our church to pieces by the fanatics (Rottengeister),
and will not cease until he has finished. Such is plainly
his object. If he cannot accomplish it through the Pope
and the Emperor, he will do it through those who are
[now] in doctrinal agreement with us ... Therefore pray
earnestly that God may preserve the Word to you, for
things will come to a dreadful pass." (12, 1174. 437.)

Reading the signs of the times, Melanchthon also
realized that Luther's prophecies would be fulfilled.His
address to the students of Wittenberg University, on
February 19, 1546, in which he announced the death of
Luther, concludes: "Obiit auriga et currus Israel. He is
dead, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof,
who guided the Church in this last old age of the world.
For the doctrine of the forgiveness of sins and of faith in
the Son of God was not discovered by human sagacity,
but revealed by God through this man. Let us therefore
love his memory and his teaching, and may we be all the
more humble and ponder the terrible calamity and the
great changes which will follow this misfortune." (C. R.
6, 59.)

Nor were these prophecies of Luther mere intuitions
or deductions based on general reflections only.
They were inductions from facts which he had not
failed to observe at Wittenberg, even in his immediate
surroundings. Seckendorf relates that Luther, when sick
at Smalcald in 1537, told the Elector of Saxony that after
his death, discord would break out in the University of
Wittenberg and that his doctrine would be changed.
(Comm. de Lutheranismo 3, 165.) In his Preface to
Luther's Table Talk, John Aurifaber reports that Luther
had frequently predicted that after his death his doctrine
would wane and decline because of false brethren,
fanatics, and sectarians, and that the truth, which in
1530 had been placed on a pinnacle at Augsburg,would
descend into the valley, since the Word of God had seldom
flourished more than forty years in one place.
(Richard Conf. Hist., 311.) Stephanus Tucher, a faithful
Lutheran preacher of Magdeburg, wrote in 1549:
"Doctor Martin Luther, of sainted memory, has frequently
repeated before many trustworthy witnesses,
and also before Doctor Augustine Schurf, these words:
．After my death not one of these [Wittenberg] theologians
will remain steadfast.' " Tucher adds: "This I have
heard of Doctor Augustine Schurf not once, but frequently.
Therefore I also testify to it before Christ, my
Lord, the righteous Judge," etc. (St. L. 12, 1177;Walther,
Kern und Stern, 7.)

It was, above all, the spirit of indifferentism toward
false doctrine, particularly concerning the Lord's
Supper, which Luther observed and deplored in his
Wittenberg colleagues: Melanchthon, Bugenhagen,
Cruciger, Eber, and Major. Shortly before his last journey
to Eisleben he invited them to his house, where he
addressed to them the following solemn words of warning:
They should "remain steadfast in the Gospel; for I
see that soon after my death the most prominent
brethren will fall away. I am not afraid of the Papists,"he
added, "for most of them are coarse, unlearned asses
and Epicureans; but our brethren will inflict the damage
on the Gospel; for ．they went out from us, but they were
not of us' (1 John 2, 19); they will give the Gospel a
harder blow than did the Papists."About the same time
Luther had written above the entrance to his study:
"Our professors are to be examined on the Lord's
Supper."When Major, who was about to leave for the
colloquy at Regensburg, entered and inquired what
these words signified, Luther answered: "The meaning
of these words is precisely what you read and what they
say; and when you and I shall have returned, an examination
will have to be held, to which you as well as others
will be cited." Major protested that he was not
addicted to any false doctrine. Luther answered:"It is by
your silence and cloaking that you cast suspicion upon
yourself. If you believe as you declare in my presence,
then speak so also in the church, in public lectures, in
sermons, and in private conversations, and strengthen
your brethren, and lead the erring back to the right
path, and contradict the contumacious spirits; otherwise
your confession is sham pure and simple, and
worth nothing. Whoever really regards his doctrine,
faith and confession as true, right, and certain cannot
remain in the same stall with such as teach, or adhere to,
false doctrine; nor can he keep on giving friendly words
to Satan and his minions. A teacher who remains silent
when errors are taught, and nevertheless pretends to be
a true teacher, is worse than an open fanatic and by his
hypocrisy does greater damage than a heretic. Nor can
he be trusted.He is a wolf and a fox, a hireling and a servant
of his belly, and ready to despise and to sacrifice
doctrine,Word, faith, Sacrament, churches, and schools.
He is either a secret bedfellow of the enemies or a skeptic
and a weathervane, waiting to see whether Christ or
the devil will prove victorious; or he has no convictions
of his own whatever, and is not worthy to be called a
pupil, let alone a teacher; nor does he want to offend
anybody, or say a word in favor of Christ, or hurt the
devil and the world."(Walther, 39f.)

#### 121.Unfortunate Issue of Smalcald War.

All too soon the predictions of Luther, and the fears
expressed by Melanchthon and others, were realized.
June 26, 1546, four months after Luther's death, Pope
and Emperor entered into a secret agreement to compel
the Protestants by force of arms to acknowledge the
decrees of the Council of Trent, and to return to the
bosom of the Roman Church. The covenant provided
that, "in the name of God and with the help and assistance
of His Papal Holiness, His Imperial Majesty
should prepare himself for war, and equip himself with
soldiers and everything pertaining to warfare against
those who objected to the Council, against the Smalcald
League, and against all who were addicted to the false
belief and error in Germany, and that he do so with all
his power and might in order to bring them back to the
old [papal] faith and to the obedience of the Holy See."
The Pope promised to assist the Emperor with 200,000
Krontaler, more than 12,000 Italian soldiers, and quite a
number of horsemen. He furthermore permitted the
Emperor to appropriate, for the purpose of this war,one
half of the total income of the church property in Spain
and 500,000 Krontaler from the revenue of the Spanish
cloisters.

While the Emperor endeavored to veil the real purpose
of his preparations, the Pope openly declared in a
bull of July 4, 1546: "From the beginning of our Papacy
it has always been our concern how to root out the
weeds of godless doctrines which the heretics have
sowed throughout Germany ...Now it has come to pass
that, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, our dearest
son in Christ, Charles, the Roman Emperor, has decided
to employ the sword against these enemies of God.
And for the protection of religion we intend to promote
this pious enterprise with all our own and the Roman
Church's possessions. Accordingly, we admonish all
Christians to assist in this war with their prayers to God
and their alms, in order that the godless heresy may be
rooted out and the dissension removed ... To each and
all who do these things we grant the most complete
indulgence and remission of all their sins." (St. L. 17,
1453ff.Walther, 10.)

The Smalcald War, so called because it was directed
against the Smalcald League, was easily won by the
Emperor. Among the causes of this unfortunate issue
were the neutral attitude of Joachim II of Brandenburg
and of other Lutheran princes, and especially the
treachery of the ambitious and unscrupulous Maurice,
Duke of Saxony and nephew of Elector John Frederick
of Saxony, who, in order to gain the Electorate of
Saxony, had made a secret agreement with the Emperor
according to which he was to join his forces with those
of the Emperor against the Lutherans. The decisive battle
was fought at Muehlberg on the Elbe,April 24, 1547.
It proved to be a crushing defeat for the Protestants.The
Elector himself was taken captive, treated as a rebel, and
sentenced to death. The sentence was read to him while
he was playing chess with his fellow-captive, Duke
Ernest of Lueneburg. John Frederick answered, he did
not believe that the Emperor would deal so severely
with him; if, however, he were in earnest, they should let
him know that he might order his affairs with his wife
and children. He then calmly turned to the Duke, saying:
"Let us continue the game; it's your move." (Jaekel,
G. d. Ref. l, 114.) The day after the battle at Muehlberg,
Torgau fell into the hands of the Emperor; and when he
threatened to execute the Elector, having already erected
a scaffold for this purpose,Wittenberg, too, though
well protected by 5,000 soldiers, signed a capitulation
on May 19, in order to save the Elector's life. On the 23d
ofMay,Wittenberg was occupied by the Emperor.Here
Charles, when standing at the grave of Luther, and
urged to have the body of "the heretic" exhumed, spoke
the memorable words that he was warring not with the
dead, but with the living. The death-sentence was
rescinded, but, apart from other cruel conditions forced
upon the Elector, he was compelled to resign in favor of
Maurice and promise to remain in captivity as long as
the Emperor should desire. His sons were granted the
districts ofWeimar, Jena, Eisenach, and Gotha. Philip of
Hesse surrendered without striking a blow, and was
likewise treacherously held in captivity and humiliated
in every possible way by the Emperor. The imperial
plenipotentiaries had assured the Landgrave that he
would not be imprisoned. Afterwards, however, the
words in the document, "not any bodily captivity-nit
eenige Leibesgefangenschaft," were fraudulently changed
by Granvella to read, "not eternal captivity-nit ewige
Leibesgefangenschaft" (Marheineke, G. d. Deut. Ref. 4,
438.) The sons of the Landgrave remained in possession
of his territory. Thus all of Southern and, barring a few
cities, also all of Northern Germany was conquered by
Charles. Everywhere the Lutherans were at the tender
mercy of the Emperor,whose undisputed power struck
terror into all Germany.

#### 122. The Augsburg Interim.

The first step to reduce the Lutherans to obedience
to the Pope was the so-called Augsburg Interim. It was
proclaimed by the Emperor at Augsburg on May 15,
1548, as the law of the Empire under the title: "Der
roemischen kaiserlichen Majestaet Erklaerung wie es
der Religion halben im heiligen Reich bis zu Austrag des
gemeinen Concilii gehalten werden soll." The people
were also forbidden to teach,write, or preach against the
document. The Interim had been prepared by the papal
bishops Julius Pflug and Michael Helding and the
court-preacher of Elector Joachim of Brandenburg,
John Agricola, a man with whom Luther had, already
since 1540, refused to have any further intercourse
owing to his insincerity and duplicity. "I go forth as the
Reformer of all Germany," Agricola boasted when he
left Berlin to attend the Diet at Augsburg, which was to
open September 1, 1547.After the Diet he bragged that
in Augsburg he had flung the windows wide open for
the Gospel; that he had reformed the Pope and made
the Emperor a Lutheran, that a golden time had now
arrived, for the Gospel would be preached in all Europe;
that he had not only been present, but had presided at
the drafting of the Interim; that he had received 500
crowns from the Emperor and 500 from King
Ferdinand, etc. (Preger, M Flacius Illyricus, l, 119.)

The document, prepared at the command of the
Emperor, was called Interim because its object was to
regulate the church affairs until the religious controversy
would be finally settled by the Council of Trent, to the
resolutions of which the Lutherans were required to
submit. It was, however, essentially papal. For the time
being, indeed, it permitted Protestant clergymen to
marry, and to celebrate the Lord's Supper in both kinds,
but demanded the immediate restoration of the
Romish customs and ceremonies, the acknowledgment
of papal supremacy iure divino, as well as the jurisdiction
of the bishops, and the adoption of articles in
which the doctrines were all explained in the sense of
the Catholic dogmas, and in which truth and falsehood,
in general, were badly mingled. Transubstantiation, the
seven sacraments, and other papal errors were reaffirmed,
while Lutheran tenets, such as the doctrine of
justification by faith alone, were either denied or omitted.

And from the fact that this Interim was nevertheless
condemned by the Pope and the Romanists, who
demanded an unqualified, blind, and unconditional
submission, the Lutherans could infer what they were to
expect after consenting to these interimistic provisions.
The general conviction among Catholics as well as
Protestants was that the Interim was but the first step to
a complete return to Romanism. Indeed, soon after its
promulgation, the Catholic Electors of Mainz and
Koeln endeavored to rob the Lutherans also of the use
of the cup and of the marriage of the priests. The
Elector of Mainz declared all such marriages void and
their children bastards. (Jaekel, 162.)

In the most important point, the doctrine of justification,
the Augsburg Interim not only omitted the sola
fide, but clearly taught that justification embraces also
renewal. When God justifies a man, the Interim
declared, He does not only absolve him from his guilt,
but also "makes him better by imparting the Holy
Ghost, who cleanses his heart and incites it through the
love of God which is shed abroad in his heart." (Frank,
Theologie d. Konkordienformel, 2, 80.) A man "is
absolved from the guilt of eternal damnation and
renewed through the Holy Spirit and thus an unjust
man becomes just." (143.) Again:"This faith obtains the
gift of the Holy Ghost, by which the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts; and after this has been added to
faith and hope, we are truly justified by the infused
righteousness which is in man; for this righteousness
consists in faith, hope, and love." (81.)

In Southern Germany, Charles V and his Italian
and Spanish troops, employing brute force, succeeded
in rigidly enforcing the Interim outwardly and temporarily.
Free cities rejecting it were deprived of their
liberties and privileges. Constance, having fallen after a
heroic defense, was annexed to Austria. Magdeburg
offered the longest resistance and was outlawed three
times. Defiantly its citizens declared: "We are saved neither
by an Interim nor by an Exterim, but by the Word
of God alone." (Jaekel 1, 166.) Refractory magistrates
were treated as rebels.Pastors who declined to introduce
the Interim were deposed, some were banished, others
incarcerated, still others even executed. In Swabia and
along the Rhine about four hundred ministers were
willing to suffer imprisonment and banishment rather
than conform to the Interim. They were driven into
exile with their families, and some of them were killed.
When Jacob Sturm of Augsburg presented his grievances
to Granvella, the latter answered: "If necessary,
one might proceed against heretics also with fire."
"Indeed," Sturm retorted, "you may kill people by fire,
but even in this way you cannot force their faith." (165.)
Bucer and Fagius, preachers in Augsburg, left for
England. Musculus was deposed because he had
preached against the Interim. Osiander was compelled
to leave Nuernberg, Erhard Schnepf, Wuerttemberg.
Among the fugitives eagerly sought throughout
Germany by the imperial henchmen was Brenz in
Schwaebisch-Hall, the renowned theologian of
Wuerttemberg, who spoke of the Interim only as
"Interitus,Ruin."(C.R. 7, 289.) The tombstone of Brenz
bears the inscription: "Voce, stylo, pietate, fide, ardore
probatus-Renowned for his eloquence, style, piety,
faithfulness, and ardor." (Jaekel, 164.) A prize of 5,000
gulden was offered for the head of Caspar Aquila, who
was one of the first to write against the Interim. (Preger
1, 12.) Of course, by persecuting and banishing their
ministers, the Emperor could not and did not win the
people. Elector Frederick II of the Palatinate consented
to introduce the Interim. But even in Southern
Germany the success of the Emperor was apparent
rather than real. The churches in Augsburg, Ulm, and
other cities stood empty as a silent protest against the
Interim and imperial tyranny.

In Northern Germany the Emperor met with more
than a mere passive resistance on the part of the people
as well as the preachers. The Interim was regarded as a
trap for the Lutherans. The slogan ran:"There is a rogue
behind the Interim! O selig ist der Mann, Der Gott vertrauen
kann Und willigt nicht ins Interim, Denn es hat
den Schalk hinter ihm!" The Interim was rejected in
Brunswick, Hamburg, Luebeck, Lueneburg, Goslar,
Bremen, Goettingen, Hannover, Einbeck, Eisleben,
Mansfeld, Stolberg, Schwarzburg, Hohenstein, Halle,
etc. Joachim of Brandenburg endeavored to introduce
it,but soon abandoned these efforts.At a convent of 300
preachers assembled in Berlin for the purpose of subscribing
to the Interim, an old minister whose name was
Leutinger, arose and declared in the presence of
Agricola, the coauthor of the Interim: "I love Agricola,
and more than him I love my Elector; but my Lord Jesus
Christ I love most," and saying this, he cast the document
handed him for subscription into the flames of
the fire burning in the hearth. Before this, Margrave
Hans, of Kuestrin, had flung away the pen handed him
for the subscription of the infamous document, saying:
"I shall never adopt this poisonous concoction,nor submit
to any council. Rather sword than pen; blood rather
than ink!"

The three Counts of Mansfeld, Hans Jorge, Hans
Albrecht, and Hans Ernest, declared in a letter of August
20, 1548, to the Emperor: "Most gracious Emperor and
Lord! As for our government, the greater part of the
people are miners, who have not much to lose and are
easily induced to leave. Nor are they willing to suffer
much coercion. Yet the welfare of our whole government
depends upon them. Besides, we know that, if we
should press the matter, all of the preachers would leave,
and the result would be a desolation of preaching and of
the Sacraments. And after losing our preachers, our
own lives and limbs would not be safe among the miners,
and we must needs expect a revolt of all the people."
(Walther 19f.) Thus the Interim before long became a
dead letter throughout the greater part of Germany.

#### 123.Attitude of John Frederick toward Interim.

In order to obtain his liberty, the vacillating Philip
of Hesse, though he had declined to submit to the resolutions
of the Council of Trent, declared himself willing
to adopt the Interim."It is better," he is reported to have
said, "to hear a mass than to play cards," etc. (Jaekel 1,
130. 162.) Special efforts were also made by the
Emperor to induce John Frederick to declare his submission
to the Council and to sanction the Interim. But
the Elector solemnly protested that this was impossible
for him. All attempts to induce him to abandon his religious
convictions met with quiet but determined resistance.
One of the cruel conditions under which the
Emperor was willing to rescind the death-sentence
passed on the Elector was, that he should consent to
everything the Emperor or the Council would prescribe
in matters of religion. But the Elector declared: "I will
rather lose my head and suffer Wittenberg to be battered
down than submit to a demand that violates my
conscience. Lieber will ich meinen Kopf verlieren und
Wittenberg zusammenschiessen lassen, als eine Forderung
eingehen, die mein Gewissen verletzt." (1, 116.) Through
Granvella the Emperor promised the Elector liberty if
he would sign the Interim. But again the Elector
declared decidedly that this was impossible for him.

In a written answer to the Emperor the ex-Elector
declared, boldly confessing his faith: "I cannot refrain
from informing Your Majesty that since the days of my
youth I have been instructed and taught by the servants
of God's Word, and by diligently searching the prophetic
and apostolic Scriptures I have also learned to know,
and (this I testify as in the sight of God) unswervingly
to adhere in my conscience to this, that the articles composing
the Augsburg Confession, and whatever is connected
therewith, are the correct, true, Christian, pure
doctrine, confirmed by, and founded in, the writings of
the holy prophets and apostles, and of the teachers who
followed in their footsteps, in such a manner that no
substantial objection can be raised against it.... Since
now in my conscience I am firmly persuaded of this, I
owe this gratefulness and obedience to God, who has
shown me such unspeakable grace, that, as I desire to
obtain eternal salvation and escape eternal damnation,
I do not fall away from the truth of His almighty will
which His Word has revealed to me, and which I know
to be the truth. For such is the comforting and also the
terrible word of God: ．Whosoever therefore shall confess
Me before men, him will I confess also before My
Father which is in heaven.But whosoever shall deny Me
before men, him will I also deny before My Father
which is in heaven,' If I should acknowledge and adopt
the Interim as Christian and godly, I would have to condemn
and deny against my own conscience, knowingly
and maliciously, the Augsburg Confession, and whatever
I have heretofore held and believed concerning the
Gospel of Christ, and approve with my mouth what I
regard in my heart and conscience as altogether contrary
to the holy and divine Scriptures. This, O my God
in heaven, would indeed be misusing and cruelly blaspheming
Thy holy name, ... for which I would have to
pay all too dearly with my soul. For this is truly the sin
against the Holy Ghost concerning which Christ says
that it shall never be forgiven, neither in this nor in the
world to come, i.e., in eternity." (Walther, 16.)

The Emperor was small enough to punish the
heroic refusal and bold confession of the Elector by
increasing the severity of his imprisonment. For now he
was deprived of Luther's writings and even of the Bible.
But the Elector, who drew the line of submission at his
conscience and faith, declared, "that they were able
indeed to deprive him of the books, but could not tear
out of his heart what he had learned from them." And
when Musculus and the Lutheran preachers of
Augsburg whom the Emperor had banished because of
their refusal to introduce the Interim, took leave of the
Elector, the latter said: "Though the Emperor has banished
you from the realm, he has not banished you from
heaven. Surely,God will find some other country where
you may preach His Word." (Jaekel. 164.)

#### 124.Melanchthon's Attitude toward the Interim.

In the beginning, Melanchthon, too, assumed an
attitude of defiance over against the Augsburg Interim.
Especially among his friends and in his private letters he
condemned it. In several letters, also to Elector Maurice,
he and his Wittenberg colleagues declared that they disapproved
of the document, and that the doctrine must
not be denied, changed, nor falsified. (C. R. 6, 874. 954.)
April 25 1548 he wrote to Camerarius that the Interim
corrupted the truth in the doctrine of justification, and
that he was unable to assent to its sophisms. (878. 900.)
April 29, 1548: "The manifest facts teach that efforts at
conciliation with our persecutors are vain. Even though
some kind of concord is patched up, still a peace will be
established such as exists between wolves and lambs.
Etiam cum sarcitur concordia qualiscumque, tamen pax
constituitur, qualis est inter lupos et agnos." (C. R. 6, 889;
Frank 4, 90.) In a letter to Christian, King of Denmark
(June 13, 1548), he said that the Interim "confirmed and
reestablished many papal errors and abuses," and that
the "abominable book would cause many dissensions in
the German nation." (C. R. 6, 923.) June 20 he wrote
with reference to the Interim: "I shall not change the
doctrine of our churches, nor assent to those who do."
(946.) July 31, to the Margrave John of Brandenburg:
"As for my person I do not intend to approve of this
book, called Interim, for which I have many weighty
reasons, and will commend my miserable life to God,
even if I am imprisoned or banished." (7, 85.) In a letter
of August 10 he speaks of the corruptions "which are
found in the Augsburg sphinx," and declares that he is
determined faithfully to guard the doctrine of the
Gospel. (97.) August 13, 1548, he wrote to Medler:
"Brenz, Nopus [Noppius], Musculus, learned, pious,
and most deserving men, have been driven from their
churches, and I hear that everywhere others are being
expelled from other places,-and Islebius [Agricola] is
shouting that this is the way to spread the Gospel."
(102.)

In a criticism of the Augsburg Interim published in
the beginning of July, 1548, Melanchthon declared:
"Although war and destruction are threatened, it is,
nevertheless, our duty to regard the Word of God as
higher; that is to say, we must not deny what we know
to be the truth of the Gospel." On November 10, 1548,
he said before a convention of theologians:"Remember
that you are the guardians of truth, and consider what
has been entrusted to you for preservation by God
through the prophets and the apostles, and, last of all,
through Dr.Luther. If that man were still living, the misfortune
of a change of doctrine would not be threatening
us; but now that there is no one who is clothed with
the authority which he had, now that there is no one
who warns as he was wont to do, and many are accepting
error for truth, the churches are brought to ruin, the
doctrine heretofore correctly transmitted is distorted,
idolatrous customs are established, fear, doubt, and
strife are reigning everywhere." (Walther, 21.)

However, though Melanchthon disapproved of the
imperial Interim, he was afraid to antagonize it openly
and unflinchingly. Yet it was just such a public and
decided testimony that was needed, and everywhere
expected of Melanchthon; for he was generally regarded
as the logical and lawful successor of Luther and as
the theological leader of the Church. July 22, 1548,
Aquila wrote: "What shall I say of the arch-knave
Eisleben, Agricola? He said: ．The Interim is the best
book and work making for unity in the whole Empire
and for religious agreement throughout all Europe. For
now the Pope is reformed, and the Emperor is a
Lutheran,'"Imploring Melanchthon to break his silence
and sound the public warning,Aquila continues:"Thou
holy man, answer and come to our assistance, defend
the Word and name of Christ and His honor (which is
the highest good on earth) against that virulent sycophant
Agricola, who is an impostor." (7, 78.)

Such were the sentiments of loyal Lutherans everywhere.
But Melanchthon, intimidated by threats of the
Emperor, and fearing for his safety, turned a deaf ear to
these entreaties. While the captive Elector was determined
to die rather than submit to the Interim, and
while hundreds of Lutheran ministers were deposed,
banished, imprisoned, and some of them even executed
because of their devotion to the truth, Melanchthon
was unwilling to expose himself to the anger of the
Emperor. And before long his fear to confess and his
refusal to give public testimony to the truth was followed
by open denial. At the behest of Elector Maurice
he consented to elaborate, as a substitute for the
Augsburg Interim, a compromise document-the socalled
Leipzig Interim.

#### 125.Melanchthon and the Leipzig Interim.

After the victory of the Emperor and the proclamation
of the Augsburg Interim,Maurice, the new-fledged
Elector, found himself in a dilemma. Charles V urged
him to set a good example in obeying and enforcing the
Interim. Indebted as he was to the Emperor for his
Electorate, he, to some extent, felt bound to obey him
also in religious matters.At the same time,Maurice was
personally not at all in agreement with the radical
Augsburg Interim and afraid of forfeiting the sympathies
of both his old and new subjects on account of it.
Nor did he fail to realize the difficulties he would
encounter in enforcing it. Accordingly, he notified the
Emperor on May 18 that he was not able to introduce
the Interim at present. Soon after, he commissioned the
Wittenberg and Leipzig theologians to elaborate, as a
substitute for the Augsburg Interim, a compromise,
more favorable and acceptable to his subjects. At the
preliminary discussions, especially at Pegau and Celle,
the theologians yielded, declaring their willingness to
submit to the will of the Emperor with respect to the
reintroduction of Romish ceremonies and to acknowledge
the authority of the Pope and bishops if they
would tolerate the true doctrine. (Preger 1, 40.) The
final upshot of it all was the new Interim, a compromise
document, prepared chiefly by Melanchthon and
adopted December 22, 1548, at Leipzig. This
"Resolution of the Diet at Leipzig" was designated by its
opponents the "Leipzig Interim."Schaff remarks:"It was
the mistake of his [Melanchthon's] life, yet not without
plausible excuses and incidental advantages. He advocated
immovable steadfastness in doctrine [?], but submission
in everything else for the sake of peace.He had
the satisfaction that the University of Wittenberg, after
temporary suspension, was restored and soon frequented
again by two thousand students. [The school was
closed May 19 and reopened October 16, 1547.] But
outside ofWittenberg and Saxony his conduct appeared
treasonable to the cause of the Reformation, and acted
as an encouragement to an unscrupulous and uncompromising
enemy.Hence the venerable man was fiercely
assailed from every quarter by friend and foe."(Creeds
1, 300.)

It is generally held that fear induced Melanchthon
to condescend to this betrayal of Lutheranism,-for
such the Leipzig Interim amounted to in reality.And,no
doubt, there is a good deal of truth in this assumption.
For Melanchthon had been told that because of his
opposition to the Augsburg Interim the anger of the
Emperor was directed against him especially, and that
he had already called upon Maurice to banish this
"arch-heretic." It certainly served the purpose of
Maurice well that he had to deal with Melanchthon,
whose fear and vacillation made him as pliable as putty,
and not with Luther, on whose unbending firmness all
of his schemes would have foundered.However, it cannot
have been mere temporary fear which induced
Melanchthon to barter away eternal truth for temporal
peace. For the theologians of Wittenberg and Leipzig
did not only identify themselves with the Leipzig
Interim while the threatening clouds of persecution
were hovering over them, but also afterwards continued
to defend their action.When the representatives of the
Saxon cities protested against some of the provisions of
the Interim, they declared, on December 28, 1548: "We
have learned your request and are satisfied with the articles
[Leipzig Interim] delivered, which not we alone, but
also several other superintendents and theologians prepared
and weighed well; therefore we are unable to
change them. For they can well be received and
observed without any violence to good conscience." (C.
R. 7, 270.) It was as late as September, 1556 that
Melanchthon, though even then only in a qualified way,
admitted that he had sinned in this matter, and should
have kept aloof from the insidious counsels of the
politicians. (8, 839.) Indeed, in 1557 and 1560 the
Leipzig and Wittenberg theologians still defended the
position they had occupied during the Interim.
Evidently, then apart from other motives of fear, etc.,
Melanchthon consented to write the Interim because he
still believed in the possibility of arriving at an understanding
with the Romanists and tried to persuade himself
that the Emperor seriously sought to abolish prevailing
errors and abuses, and because the theological
views he entertained were not as far apart from those of
the Leipzig compromise as is frequently assumed.

#### 126. Provisions of Leipzig Interim.

The professed object of the Leipzig Interim was to
effect a compromise in order to escape persecution and
desolation of the churches by adhering to the doctrine,
notably of justification, but yielding in matters pertaining
to ceremonies, etc. December 18, 1548,
Melanchthon (in the name of George of Anhalt) wrote
to Burchard concerning the Interim adopted four days
later:"They [Maurice and the estates] hope to be able to
ward off dangers if we receive some rites which are not
in themselves vicious; and the charge of unjust obstinacy
is made if in such things we are unwilling to contribute
toward public tranquillity.... In order, therefore,
to retain necessary things, we are not too exacting with
respect to such as are unnecessary, especially since
heretofore these rites have, to a great extent, remained in
the churches of these regions....We know that much is
said against this moderation, but the devastation of the
churches, such as is taking place in Swabia, would be a
still greater offense." (7, 251ff.) The plan of
Melanchthon therefore was to yield in things which he
regarded as unnecessary in order to maintain the truth
and avoid persecution.

As a matter of fact, however, the Leipzig Interim,
too, was in every respect a truce over the corpse of true
Lutheranism. It was a unionistic document sacrificing
Lutheranism doctrinally as well as practically. The
obnoxious features of the Augsburg Interim had not
been eliminated, but merely toned down. Throughout,
the controverted doctrines were treated in ambiguous
or false formulas. Tschackert is correct in maintaining
that, in the articles of justification and of the Church,
"the fundamental thoughts of the Reformation doctrine
were catholicized" by the Leipzig Interim. (508.)
Even the Lutheran sola (sola fide, by faith alone) is omitted
in the article of justification. The entire matter is
presented in terms which Romanists were able to interpret
in the sense of their doctrine of "infused righteousness,
iustitia infusa." Faith is coordinated with other
virtues, and good works are declared to be necessary to
salvation."Justification by faith,"says Schmauk,"is there
[in the Leipzig Interim] so changed as to mean that man
is renewed by the Holy Spirit, and can fulfil righteousness
with his works, and that God will, for His Son's sake
accept in believers this weak beginning of obedience in
this miserable, frail nature." (Conf. Prin., 596.)

Furthermore, the Leipzig Interim indirectly admits
the Semi-Pelagian teaching regarding original sin and
free will, while other doctrines which should have been
confessed are passed by in silence. It recognizes the
supremacy of the Pope, restores the power and jurisdiction
of the bishops, acknowledges the authority of the
council, approves of a number of ceremonies objectionable
as such (e.g., the Corpus Christi Festival), and
advocates the reintroduction of these and others in
order to avoid persecution and to maintain outward
peace with the Papists.

Self-evidently, in keeping with the Interim, the
Pope also could no longer be regarded as, and publicly
declared to be, the Antichrist. In 1561 Flacius wrote that
at that time the suspected Lutherans did not consider
the Pope the Antichrist. Simon Musaeus and others
were banished because they refused to eliminate the
hymn "Erhalt uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort" from their
services. (Walther, 25.)-Such, then, being the character
of the Leipzig Interim, it stands to reason that this document,
adopted as it was by Melanchthon and other
Lutheran leaders, was bound to become a fertile source
of numerous and violent controversies.

#### 127. Flacius and Other Opponents of Interimists.

The Leipzig Interim was imposed upon the
churches of Electoral Saxony as a directory for teaching,
preaching, and worship. Melanchthon declared that it
could be adopted with a good conscience, and hence
should be introduced, as demanded by Maurice, in
order to insure the peace of the Church. At Wittenberg
and other places corresponding efforts were made. But
everywhere the result was dissension and strife. The
Interim defeated its own purpose. Pastors who declined
to conform were deposed, banished, incarcerated or
abused in other ways. And wherever faithful ministers
were removed, the people refused to be served by the
hirelings who took their places. At the very convention
at Leipzig where the Interim was adopted, Wolfgang
Pfentner, Superintendent at Annaberg, declared: "What
caused them to reintroduce such tomfooleries [Romish
ceremonies]? Were they growing childish again? They
might do what they wanted to, but as for himself, he
could not consent [to the Interim]. And even if he
should permit himself to be deceived, his parishioners
would not accept it. For in a letter delivered by a messenger
on horseback they had charged him to agree to
no ungodly article, or not return to them. Accordingly,
he would have his head cut off at Leipzig and suffer this
with a good conscience rather than give offense to his
church." (Walther, 22.)

December 24, three days after the adoption of the
Interim, representatives of the cities in Saxony presented
complaints to Elector Maurice and Melanchthon
against some of the provisions of the document. They
protested particularly against the reinstitution of
Extreme Unction, the Festival of Corpus Christi, and
the use of chrism at Baptism. (C. R. 7, 270.) Even the
Wittenberg theologians finally admitted that in consequence
of "the Interim the rupture had become so great
that there was an agreement neither of one church with
another, nor, in the same church, of any deacon, any
schoolmaster, or sexton with his pastor, nor of one
neighbor with another, nor of members of the household
with one another." (Walther, 23.)

Foremost among the champions of true
Lutheranism over against the Interimists were John
Hermann, Aquila, Nicholas Amsdorf, John Wigand,
Alberus, Gallus,Matthias Judex,Westphal, and especially
Matthias Flacius Illyricus, then (from 1544 to 1549) a
member of the Wittenberg faculty,where he opposed all
concessions to the Adiaphorists. It is due, no doubt, to
Flacius more than to any other individual that true
Lutheranism and with it the Lutheran Church was
saved from annihilation in consequence of the Interims.
In 1548 he began his numerous and powerful publications
against them. In the same year, 1548, the following
book of John Hermann appeared: "That during These
Dangerous Times Nothing should be Changed in the
Churches of God in Order to Please the Devil and the
Antichrist." In 1549: "Against the Mean Devil who Now
Again is Disguising Himself as an Angel of Light."

In 1549, when he was no longer safe in Wittenberg,
Flacius removed to Magdeburg then the only safe asy-
lum in all Germany for such as were persecuted on
account of their Lutheran faith and loyalty, where he
was joined by such "exiles of Christ" as Wigand, Gallus,
and others,who had also been banished and persecuted
because of their opposition to the Interim. Here they
inaugurated a powerful propaganda by publishing
broadsides of annihilating pamphlets against the
Interim, as well as its authors, patrons, and abettors.
They roused the Lutheran consciousness everywhere,
and before long the great majority of Lutherans stood
behind Flacius and the heroes ofMagdeburg. The publications
emanating from this fortress caused such an
aversion to the Adiaphoristic princes as well as theologians
among the people that from the very outset all
their plans and efforts were doomed to failure, and the
sinister schemes of the Pope and Emperor were frustrated.
Because of this able and staunch defense of
Lutheranism and the determined opposition to any
unionistic compromise, Magdeburg at that time was
generally called "God's chancellery, Gottes Kanzlei."Nor
did the opposition subside when this Lutheran stronghold,
thrice outlawed by the Emperor, was finally, after
a siege of thirteen months, captured by Maurice. In
their attacks the champions of Magdeburg were joined
also by the ministers of Hamburg and other places.
Only in Saxony and Brandenburg the policy of
Melanchthon was defended.

As the conflict extended, it grew in bitterness,
revealing with increasing luridness the insincerity and
dishonesty of the Philippists. True Lutherans everywhere
were satisfied that the adoption also of the
Leipzig Interim was tantamount to a complete surrender
of Lutheranism. Their animosity against this document
was all the stronger because it bore the stamp of
the Wittenberg and Leipzig theologians and was sponsored
by Melanchthon, the very man whom they had
regarded as Luther's successor and as the leader of the
Church. This, too, was the reason why the Leipzig
Interim caused even more resentment among the
Lutherans, especially in Northern Germany, than did
the Augsburg Interim. In their view,Melanchthon and
his colleagues had betrayed the cause of the
Reformation and practically joined their forces with
those of the Romanists, even as Maurice had betrayed
the Lutherans politically when fighting at the side of the
Emperor against his own coreligionists. Tschackert
remarks: "In view of the fact that at that time about 400
Evangelical pastors in Southern Germany, because of
their refusal to adopt the Augsburg Interim, had suffered
themselves to be driven from their charges and
homes and wandered about starving, many with their
wives and children, the yielding of the theologians of
Electoral Saxony could but appear as unpardonable and
as a betrayal of the Church." (508.)

#### 128.Grief over Melanchthon's Inconstancy.

In consequence of his dubious attitude,
Melanchthon also, who before this had been generally
honored as the leader of the Lutheran Church, completely
lost his prestige, even among many of his formerly
most devoted friends. The grief and distress experienced
by loyal Lutherans at his wavering and yielding
is eloquently expressed by Antonius Corvinus,
Superintendent at Kalenberg-Goettingen, the Lutheran
martyr, who, because of his opposition to the Interim,
was incarcerated for three years, in consequence of
which he died, 1553. In a letter dated September 25,
1549, he implored his friend to abandon the Interim,
and to "return to his pristine candor, his pristine sincerity,
and his pristine constancy," and "to think, say,write,
and do what is becoming to Philip, the Christian
teacher, not the court philosopher." Peace, indeed, was
desirable, but it must not be obtained by distracting the
churches.Christ had also declared that He did not come
to bring peace, but the sword. Even the heathen
Horatius Flaccus had said: "Si fractus illabitur orbis,
impavidum ferient ruinae." How much more should
Christians avoid cowardice! One must not court the
cross wantonly, but it must be borne courageously
when for the sake of truth it cannot be avoided, etc.

In the original, Corvinus's letter reads, in part, as
follows: "O mi Philippe, o, inquam, Philippe noster, rede
per immortalem Christum ad pristinum candorem, ad
pristinam sinceritatem ad pristinam constantiam! Ne
languescito ista tua formidine ac pusillanimitate nostrorum
animos tantopere!... Non sis tantorum in ecclesia
offendiculorum autor! Ne sinas, tua tam egregia scripta,
dicta, facta, quibus mirifice hactenus de ecclesia ac scholis
meritus es, isto condonationis, novationis, moderationis
naevo ad eum modum deformari! Cogita, quantum
animi ista vestra consilia et adversariis addant et nostris
adimant! ... Rogamus, ut, professionis tuae memor, talem
te cum Vitebergensibus tuis iam geras, qualem te ab initio
huius causae gessisti, hoc est, ut ea sentias, dicas, scribas,
agas, quae Philippum, doctorem Christianum, non
aulicum philosophum decent." (Tschackert, 506.)

In a similar manner Melanchthon was admonished
also by Brenz, who preferred exile and misery to the
Interim. In a letter written early in 1549 he said: "It is
also most manifest that the Interitus [Ruin, a term
employed by Brenz for Interim] conflicts with the Word
of the Lord.What concord, then, can be found between
such conflicting things? You think that one ought to
come to the assistance of the churches and pious ministers.
Correct if such can be done without dishonor to
Christ. Perhaps you believe that the Interimists will tolerate
the pious doctrine if we agree to accept all their
ceremonies. But do you not know that it is clearly commanded
in the introduction of the Interitus that no one
shall speak or write against this book? What kind of liberty
in regard to doctrine is this? Therefore, if the
Church and the pious ministers cannot be saved in any
other way than by dishonoring the pious doctrine, let us
commend them to Christ, the Son of God.He will take
care of them.Meanwhile let us patiently bear our exile
and wait for the Lord." (C. R. 7, 289.)

June 18, 1550, Calvin also wrote a letter of warning
to Melanchthon, in which he said in substance: "My
grief renders me almost speechless.How the enemies of
Christ enjoy your conflicts with the Magdeburgers
appears from their mockeries.Nor do I acquit you altogether
of all guilt. Permit me to admonish you freely as
a true friend. I should like to approve of all your actions.
But now I accuse you before your very face (ego te nunc
apud te ipsum accuso). This ialis Sententiaeur defense: If
the purity of doctrine be retained, externals should not
be pertinaciously contended for (modo retineatur doctrinae
puritas, de rebus externis non esse pertinaciter dimicandum).
But you extend the adiaphora too far. Some
of them plainly conflict with the Word of God. Now,
since the Lord has drawn us into the fight, it behooves
us to struggle all the more manfully (eo viriIius nos eniti
decebat). You know that your position differs from that
of the multitude. The hesitation of the general or leader
is more disgraceful than the flight of an entire regiment
of common soldiers. Unless you set an example of
unflinching steadfastness, all will declare that vacillation
cannot be tolerated in such a man. By yielding but a little,
you alone have caused more lamentations and complaints
than a hundred ordinary men by open apostasy
(Itaque plures tu unus paululum cedendo querimonias et
gemitus excitasti quam centum mediocres aperta defectione).
I would die with you a hundred times rather than
see you survive the doctrine surrendered by you. You
will pardon me for unloading into your bosom these
pitiable, though useless groans." (Schluesselburg 13,
635; C. R. 41 [Calvini Opera {{< hiddenanchor 13 >}}13{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 593; Frank 4, 88.)

#### 129. Interim Eliminated Politically, But Not Theologically.

It was also in the interest of allaying the animosity
against his own person that Elector Maurice had prevailed
upon Melanchthon to frame the Leipzig Interim.
But in this respect, too, the document proved to be a
dismal failure. Openly the people, his own former subjects
included, showed their contempt for his person
and character. Everywhere public sentiment was
aroused against him. He was held responsible for the
captivity and shameful treatment of Philip ofHesse and
especially of John Frederick, whom the people admired
as the Confessor of Augsburg and now also as the innocent
Martyr of Lutheranism. Maurice, on the other
hand, was branded a mameluke, condemned as a renegade
and an apostate, despised as the traitor of
Lutheranism, and abhorred as the "Judas of Meissen,"
who had sold his coreligionists for an electorate.

At the same time Maurice was provoked by the
arbitrary manner in which the Emperor exploited and
abused his victory by a repeated breach of his promises,
and by the treacherous and shameful treatment accorded
his father-in-law, Philip of Hesse. Chagrined at all
this and fully realizing the utter impossibility of enforcing
the Interim,Maurice decided to end the matter by a
single stroke which at the same time would atone for his
treachery, and turn shame into glory and the vile name
of a "traitor" into the noble title of "Champion of
Protestantism." Accordingly Maurice, easily the match
of Charles in duplicity and cunning, secretly prepared
his plans, and, suddenly turning his army against the
unsuspecting Emperor, drove him from Innsbruck,
scared the "Fathers of Trent" to their homes, and on
April 5, 1552, victoriously entered Augsburg, where he
was received with great rejoicing. The fruits of this victory
were the Treaties of Passau August 2, 1552, and of
Augsburg, 1555, which for the first time granted religious
liberty to the Protestants. The latter placed
Lutherans and Catholics on an equal footing in the
Empire and, according to the rule: Cuius regio, eius religio,
gave every prince religious control in his own territory,
non-conformists being granted the right of emigration.
To the great advantage of the Romanists, however,
the treaty also provided that territories ruled by
bishops must remain Catholic even though the ruler
should turn Protestant.

But while the Interim was thus eliminated as a
political and practical issue, the theological controversy
precipitated by it continued unabated. Its political elimination
cleared the situation toward the Romanists, but
left conditions within the Lutheran Church unsettled. It
neither unified nor pacified the Church. It neither eliminated
the false doctrines and unionistic principles and
tendencies injected by the Interimists, nor did it restore
confidence in the doctrinal soundness, loyalty, and sincerity
of the vacillating Philippists, who had caused the
first breach in the Lutheran Church."Does it agree with
the character of the Lutheran Church to tolerate and
approve the doctrines and principles contained and
involved in the Interim, and to harbor and fellowship
such indifferentists as framed, indorsed, and defended
this document?" such and similar were the questions
which remained live issues even after the Interim was
politically dead. The theological situation within the
Lutheran Church, therefore, was not changed in the
least when the annihilation threatening her from without
was warded off by the victory of Maurice over the
Emperor.The Interim was fraught with doctrinal issues
which made unavoidable the subsequent controversies.

