---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XI. Controversies Following the Interim and Settled by the Formula of Concord.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 11
---


#### 130. Three Theological Parties.

In the theological conflicts after Luther's death
three parties may be distinguished. The first party
embraced chiefly the Interimists, the Synergists, and the
Crypto-Calvinists. They were adherents of Philip
Melanchthon, hence called Melanchthonians or, more
commonly, Philippists, and were led by the theologians
of Electoral Saxony. Their object was to supplant the
authority and theology of Luther by the unionistic and
liberal views of Melanchthon. Their headquarters were
the universities of Wittenberg and Leipzig. Some of
their chief representatives were: Joachim Camerarius
(born 1500, professor of Greek in Leipzig, a close friend
ofMelanchthon, died 1574); Paul Eber (born 1511, professor
in Wittenberg, died 1568); Caspar Cruciger, Jr.
(born 1525, professor in Wittenberg, died at Cassel
1597); Christopher Pezel (born 1539, professor in
Wittenberg, died 1600 or 1604); George Major (Meier;
born 1502, professor in Wittenberg, died 1574); Caspar
Peucer (doctor of medicine, son-in-law of
Melanchthon; born 1525, imprisoned from 1574 till
1586 died 1602); Paul Crell (born 1531, professor in
Wittenberg, died 1579); John Pfefflnger (born 1493,
professor in Leipzig, died 1573); Victorin Strigel (born
1524, 1548 professor in Jena, died in Heidelberg 1569);
John Stoessel (born 1524, died in prison 1576); George
Cracow (born 1525, professor of jurisprudence in
Wittenberg, privy counselor in Dresden, died in prison
1575).

The second party, the so-called Gnesio-Lutherans
(genuine Lutherans), was represented chiefly by the theologians
of Ducal Saxony and embraced such staunch
and loyal men as Amsdorf, Flacius, Wigand, Gallus,
Matthias Judex,Moerlin, Tileman Hesshusius, Timann,
Westphal, and Simon Musaeus. Though some of these
leaders were later discredited by falling into extreme
positions themselves, they all proved to be valiant
champions of Luther and most determined opponents
of the Philippists. The strongholds of this party were
Magdeburg and the University of Jena, founded by the
sons of John Frederick in 1547. Led by Flacius, this university
unflinchingly opposed the modified and unionistic
Lutheranism advocated by the Philippists at
Wittenberg and Leipzig. Seeberg says, in substance: The
Gnesio-Lutherans were opposed to the philosophy of
the Philippists and stood for "the simple Biblical truth
as Luther had understood it." Even when opposed by
the government, they defended the truth, and were willing
to suffer the consequences. Strict doctrinal discipline
was exercised by them. They opposed with equal
determination the errors also of their fellow-combatants:
Amsdorf, Flacius, Poach, and others. Intellectually
they were superior to the Philippists. Seeberg concludes:
"In the forms of their time (which were not outgrown
by any one of the Philippists either) they preserved to
the Church genuine Luther-treasures-echtes
Luthergut." (Dogmengeschichte 4, 2, 482.)

The third, or center-party, was composed of the
loyal Lutherans who took no conspicuous part in the
controversies, but came to the front when the work of
pacification began. They were of special service in settling
the controversies, framing the Formula of Concord,
and restoring a true and godly peace to our Church.
Prominent among them were Brenz, Andreae,
Chemnitz, Selneccer, Chytraeus, Cornerus, Moerlin,
and others. These theologians were, on the one hand,
opposed to all unnecessary logomachies i.e., controversies
involving no doctrinal differences, and, at the same
time, were most careful not to fall into any extreme
position themselves. On the other hand, however, they
approved of all controversies really necessary in the
interest of truth, rejected and condemned all forms of
indifferentism and unionism, and strenuously opposed
every effort at sacrificing, veiling, or compromising any
doctrine by ambiguous formulas for the sake of external
peace or any other policy whatsoever. (CONC.TRIGL.,
855f.)

#### 131.Various Theological Controversies.

Following is a synopsis and summary of the main
controversies within the Lutheran Church after the
death of Luther, which were settled in the first eleven
articles of the Formula of Concord. The sequence of
these articles, however, is not strictly historical and
chronological, but dogmatic. In the main, the arrangement
of the Augsburg Confession is observed.

The first of these controversies was the so-called
Adiaphoristic Controversy, from 1548 to 1555, in which
the Wittenberg and Leipzig theologians (Melanchthon,
Eber, Pfeffinger, etc.) defended the Leipzig Interim and
the reintroduction of Romish ceremonies into the
Lutheran Church. They were opposed by the champions
of a consistent and determined Lutheranism, led by
Flacius, who declared:"Nihil est adiaphoron in statu confessionis
et scandali.Nothing is an adiaphoron in case of
confession and offense." The controversy was decided
by Article X.

The second is the Majoristic Controversy, from
1551 to 1562, in which George Major and Justus
Menius defended the phrase ofMelanchthon that good
works are necessary to salvation. They were opposed by
the loyal Lutherans, of whom Amsdorf, however, lapsed
into the opposite error: Good works are detrimental to
salvation. This controversy was settled by Article IV.

The third is the Synergistic Controversy, from 1555
to 1560, in which Pfeffinger, Eber, Major, Crell, Pezel,
Strigel, and Stoessel held with Melanchthon that man
by his own natural powers cooperates in his conversion.
Their opponents (Amsdorf, Flacius, Hesshusius,
Wigand, Gallus,Musaeus, and Judex) taught, as formu-
lated by Flacius: "Solus Deus convertit hominem ... Non
excludit voluntatem, sed omnem efficaciam et operationem
eius.... God alone converts man ... He does not
exclude the will, but all efficaciousness and operation of
the same." This controversy was decided and settled by
Article II.

The fourth is the Flacian Controversy, from 1560 to
1575, in which Flacius, supported by Cyriacus
Spangenberg, Christian Irenaeus, Matthias Wolf, I. F.
Coelestinus, Schneider, and others, maintained that
original sin is not an accident, but the very substance of
fallen man. The Lutherans, including the Philippists,
were practically unanimous in opposing this error. It
was decided by Article I.

The fifth was the Osiandristic and the Stancarian
Controversy, from 1549 to 1566, in which Andrew
Osiander denied the forensic character of justification,
and taught that Christ is our righteousness only according
to His divine nature, while Stancarus contended that
Christ is our righteousness according to His human
nature only. Both, Osiander as well as Stancarus, were
opposed by Melanchthon, Flacius, and practically all
other Lutherans, the Philippists included. This controversy
was settled by Article III.

The sixth was the Antinomistic Controversy, from
1527 to 1556, in which various false views concerning
the Law and the Gospel were defended, especially by
John Agricola who maintained that repentance (contrition)
is not wrought by the Law, but by the Gospel (a
view which, in a modified form was later on defended
also by Wittenberg Philippists), and, after Luther's
death, by Poach and Otto, who rejected the so-called
Third Use of the Law. The questions involved in these
Antinomian controversies were decided by Articles V
and VI.

The seventh was the Crypto-Calvinistic
Controversy, from 1560 to 1574, in which the
Philippists in Wittenberg,Leipzig, and Dresden (Peucer,
Cracow, Stoessel, etc.) endeavored gradually to supplant
Luther's doctrines concerning the Lord's Supper and
the majesty of the human nature of Christ by the
Calvinistic teachings on these points. These secret and
dishonest enemies of Lutheranism were opposed by
true Lutherans everywhere, notably by the theologians
of Ducal Saxony. In 1574 they were publicly unmasked
as deceivers and Calvinistic schemers. The controversy
was settled by Articles VII and VIII.

The two last controversies were of a local nature.
The first was chiefly confined to Hamburg, the second
to Strassburg. In the former city John Aepinus taught
that Christ's descent into hell was a part of His suffering
and humiliation. He was opposed by his colleagues in
Hamburg. In Strassburg John Marbach publicly
denounced Zanchi, a Crypto-Calvinist, for teaching
that faith, once engendered in a man, cannot be lost.
The questions involved in these two articles are dealt
with in Articles IX and XI, respectively.

#### 132.Conflicts Unavoidable.

When describing the conflicts after Luther's death,
historians frequently deplore "the dreadful controversies
of these dark days of doctrinal extremists and the
polemical spirit of rigid Lutheranism." G. J. Planck, in
particular, characterized them all as useless quarrels and
personal wranglings of narrow-minded, bigoted adherents
of Luther, who vitiated original Lutheranism by
making it essentially a matter of "pure doctrine."To the
present day indifferentistically inclined historians are
wont to mar their pages with similar views.

True,"pure doctrine,""unity in the pure doctrine of
the Gospel," such was the shibboleth of the faithful
Lutherans over against the Melanchthonians and other
errorists. But this was neither reprehensible doctrinalism
nor a corruption of original Lutheranism, but the
very principle from which it was born and for which
Luther contended throughout his life-a principle of
life or death for the Lutheran Church. It was the false
doctrine of justification which made Luther a most miserable
man. It was the pure doctrine as taught by St.Paul
which freed his conscience, transported him into
Paradise, as he himself puts it, and made him the
Reformer of the Church. Ever since, purity of doctrine
was held, by Luther and all true Lutheran theologians,
to be of paramount import to Christianity and the
Church. Fully realizing that adulteration of any part of
the Christian doctrine was bound to infect also the doctrine
of faith and justification and thus endanger salvation,
they earnestly warned against, and opposed, every
deviation from the clear Word of God, no matter how
insignificant it might appear.They loved the truth more
than external peace, more even than their own lives.
Hence they found it impossible to be silent, apathetic,
and complacent spectators while the Philippists and
others denied, attacked, and corrupted the truth taught
by Luther from the Word of God.

Accordingly, since the Leipzig Interim involved and
maintained doctrines and principles subversive of genuine
Lutheranism and was prepared, introduced, and
defended by the very men who were regarded as pillars
of the Lutheran Church, it was evident from the outset
that this document must of necessity precipitate most
serious internal troubles. From the moment the
Wittenbergers cast the Interim as a firebrand into the
Church, a domestic warfare was unavoidable,-if
indeed any true disciples of Luther still remained in the
Church of which he, and not Melanchthon, was the
founder. While the Augsburg Interim resulted in an
external theological warfare of the Lutherans against the
Romanists, the Leipzig Interim added a most serious
domestic conflict, which conscientious Lutherans could
not evade, though it well-nigh brought our Church to
the brink of destruction. For now the issue was not
merely how to resist the Pope and the Romanists, but,
how to purge our own Church from the Interimists and
their pernicious principles.And as long as the advocates
of the Interim or of other aberrations from the old
Lutheran moorings refused to abandon their errors,
and nevertheless insisted on remaining in the Church,
there was no real unity in the truth. Hence there could
also be no true peace and brotherly harmony among
the Lutherans. And the way to settle these differences
was not indifferently to ignore them, nor unionistically
to compromise them by adopting ambiguous formulas,
but patiently to discuss the doctrines at issue until an
agreement in the truth was reached, which finally was
done by means of the Formula of Concord.

True, these controversies endangered the very existence
of our Church. But the real cause of this was not
the resistance which the loyal Lutherans offered to the
errorists, nor even the unseemly severity by which the
prosecution of these controversies was frequently
marred, but the un-Lutheran spirit and the false principles
and doctrines manifested and defended by the
opponents. In so far as divine truth was defended and
error opposed, these controversies were truly wars to
end war, and to establish real peace and true unity within
our Church. A cowardly surrender to the indifferentistic
spirit, the unionistic policy, the false principles,
and the erroneous doctrines of the Interimists would
have been tantamount to a complete transformation of
our Church and a total annihilation of genuine
Lutheranism.

The manner in which these controversies were conducted,
it is true, was frequently such as to obstruct,
rather than further, mutual understanding and peace.
As a rule, it is assumed that only the genuine Lutherans
indulged in unseemly polemical invective, and spoke
and wrote in a bitter and spiteful tone. But the
Melanchthonians were to say the least, equally guilty.
And when censuring this spirit of combativeness, one
must not overlook that the ultimate cause of the most
violent of these controversies was the betrayal of the
Lutheran Church by the Interimists; and that the severity
of the polemics of the loyal Lutherans did not, at
least not as a rule, emanate from any personal malice
toward Melanchthon, but rather from a burning zeal to
maintain sound Lutheranism, and from the fear that by
the scheming and the indifference of the Philippists the
fruits of Luther's blessed work might be altogether lost
to the coming generations. The "peace-loving"
Melanchthon started a conflagration within his own
church in order to obtain a temporal and temporary
peace with the Romanists; while the loyal Lutherans,
inasmuch as they fought for the preservation of genuine
Lutheranism, stood for, and promoted, a truly honorable,
godly, and lasting peace on the basis of eternal
truth. And while the latter fought honestly and in the
open, the Philippists have never fully cleared themselves
from the charges of duplicity, dishonesty, and dissimulation.

#### 133.Melanchthon Prime Mover of Conflicts.

The Leipzig Interim was the signal for a general and
prolonged warfare within the Lutheran Church. It contained
the germs of various doctrinal errors, and produced
a spirit of general distrust and suspicion, which
tended to exaggerate and multiply the real differences.
Schmauk says: "The seeds of the subsequent controversies
are all to be found in the Leipzig Interim." (595.) At
any rate, most of the controversies after Luther's death
flowed from, or were in some way or other connected
with, this unfortunate document. Such is the view also
of the Formula of Concord,which declares that the thirty
years' controversies which it settled originated especially
in the Interim. (857, 19; 947, 29.)

Yet the Interim was rather the occasion than the
ultimate cause of these conflicts. Long before the flames
of open discord burst forth, the embers of secret doctrinal
dissension had been glowing under the surface.
Even during the life of Luther much powder had been
secretly stored up for which the Interim furnished the
spark. This is proved, among other things, by Luther's
predictions (referred to in the preceding chapter) concerning
his own colleagues. And above all it was the
"peace-loving" Philip who first and most successfully
sowed the dragon's teeth of discord. Melanchthon's
doctrinal deviations from the teachings of Luther and
from his own former position must be regarded as the
last cause of both the Leipzig Interim and the lamentable
controversies that followed in its wake. Indeed, a
tragic sight to behold: The co-laborer of Luther, the servant
of the Reformation second only to Luther, the
Praeceptor Germaniae, the ardent and anxious lover of
peace, etc.-untrue to his confiding friend, disloyal to
the cause of the Reformation, and the chief cause of
strife and dissension in the Lutheran Church! And withal,
Melanchthon, mistaking external union for real
unity and temporal peace with men for true peace with
God, felt satisfied that he had spent the efforts of his
entire life in the interest of the true welfare of the
Church! Shortly before his death (April 19, 1560) he
expressed his joy that now he would be delivered from
the "fury of the theologians." On a sheet of paper found
on his table were written a number of reasons why he
feared death less. One of them was: "Liberaberis ab
aerumnis et a rabie teologorum. You will be delivered
from toils and from the fury of the theologians." (C. R.
9, 1098.) Thus even in the face of death he did not realize
that he himself was the chief cause of the conflicts
that had embittered his declining years!

#### 134. Melanchthon's Humanistic and Unionistic Tendencies.

Till about 1530 Melanchthon seems to have been in
complete harmony with Luther, and to have followed
him enthusiastically. To propagate, coin, and bring into
scholastic form the Christian truths once more brought
to light by the Reformer he considered to be his peculiar
mission. But his secret letters and, with gradually
increasing clearness and boldness, also his publications
show that later on he began to strike out on paths of his
own, and to cultivate and disseminate doctrines incompatible
with the Lutheranism of Luther. In a measure,
these deviations were known also to the Wittenberg students
and theologians, to Cordatus, Stifel,Amsdorf, the
Elector John Frederick, Brueck, and Luther, who also
called him to account whenever sufficient evidence
warranted his doing so. (Lehre und Wehre 1908, 61ff.)

In a letter to Cordatus, dated April 15, 1537,
Melanchthon was bold enough to state that he had
made many corrections in his writings and was glad of
the fact: "Multa ultro correxi in libellis meis et correxisse
me gaudeo." (C. R. 3, 342.) In discussing the squabble
between Cordatus and Melanchthon whether good
works are necessary for salvation, Luther is reported by
the former to have said, in 1536: "To Philip I leave the
sciences and philosophy and nothing else. But I shall be
compelled to chop off the head of philosophy, too."
(Kolde, Analecta, 266.) Melanchthon, as Luther put it,
was always troubled by his philosophy; that is to say,
instead of subjecting his reason to the Word of God, he
was inclined to balance the former against the latter.The
truth is that Melanchthon never fully succeeded in freeing
himself from his original humanistic tendencies, a
fact which gave his mind a moralistic rather than a truly
religious and Scriptural bent. Even during the early
years of the Reformation when he was carried away
with admiration for Luther and his work, the humanistic
undercurrent did not disappear altogether. January
22, 1525, he wrote to Camerarius: "Ego mihi conscius
sum, non ullam ob causam unquam teqeologhkevnai, nisi
at mores meos emendarem. I am conscious of the fact
that I have never theologized for any other reason than
to improve my morals." (C. R. 1, 722.) Such, then, being
his frame of mind, it was no wonder that he should
finally desert Luther in most important points, lapse
into synergism and other errors, and, in particular value
indifferentistically doctrinal convictions, notably on the
real presence in the Lord's Supper and the person of
Christ."Over against Luther,"says Schaff,"Melanchthon
represented the unionistic and liberal type of
Lutheranism." (Creeds, l, 259.) This is correct; but the
stricture must be added that, since unionism and liberalism
are incompatible with the very essence of
Lutheranism,Melanchthonianism as such was in reality
not a "type," but a denial of Lutheranism.

Melanchthon lacked the simple faith in, and the
firm adherence and implicit submission to, the Word of
God which made Luther the undaunted and invincible
hero of the Reformation. Standing four-square on the
Bible and deriving from this source of divine power
alone all his theological thoughts and convictions,
Luther was a rock, firm and immovable.With him every
theological question was decided and settled conclusively
by quoting a clear passage from the Holy
Scriptures, while Melanchthon, devoid of Luther's single-
minded and whole-hearted devotion to the Word of
God, endeavored to satisfy his reason as well.
Consequently he lacked assurance and firm conviction,
wavered and vacillated, and was never fully satisfied that
the position he occupied was really the only correct one,
while, on the other hand, he endeavored to present his
views concerning some of the disputed doctrines in
ambiguous and indefinite terms."We have twenty-eight
large volumes of Melanchthon's writings," says C. P.
Krauth, "and, at this hour, impartial and learned men
are not agreed as to what were his views on some of the
profoundest questions of church doctrine, on which
Melanchthon was writing all his life!"(Conservative Ref.,
291; Schmauk, 748.) This indefinite and wavering attitude
towards divine truth, the natural consequence of
the humanistic bent of his mind, produced in
Melanchthon a general tendency and proneness to surrender
or compromise doctrinal matters in the interest
of policy, and to barter away eternal truth for temporal
peace. It made him an indifferentist and a unionist,
always ready to strike a bargain also in matters pertaining
to Christian faith, and to cover doctrinal differences
with ambiguous formulas.While Luther's lifelong attitude
on matters of Christian doctrine is characterized
by the famous words spoken by him at Worms in 1521:
"Ich kann nicht anders, I cannot do otherwise,"
Melanchthon, treating even questions of faith as matters
of expediency rather than of conscience, was the
man who, as a rule, could also do otherwise, and who
was great in manufacturing "Polish boots," as the
ambiguous phrases by which he endeavored to unite
opposing parties were called by the Lutherans in Reuss.

In order to preserve peace with the Romanists at
Augsburg in 1530, he did not hesitate to sacrifice
Lutheran truths and to receive into the bargain a number
of what he considered minor papal errors. In his
subsequent overtures to the Reformed he was more
than willing to make similar concessions. The spirit of
Melanchthon was the spirit of religious indifference and
of unionism, which, though thoroughly eliminated by
the Formula of Concord, was from time to time revived
within the Lutheran Church by such men as Calixtus,
Spener, Zinzendorf,Neander, and, in our own country,
by S. S. Schmucker.

The unionistic tendencies and doctrinal corruptions
which Melanchthon injected into Lutheranism
were all the more dangerous to our Church because
they derived special weight and prestige from the fact
that Luther had unstintingly praised his gifts, his books,
and the services he had rendered the Church (St. L. 18,
1671; 23, 1152), that he was now generally regarded as
Luther's successor with regard to theological leadership
of the Church; and that he was gratefully admired as the
Praeceptor Germaniae by a host of loyal pupils, who
made it a point also to cultivate just those theological
peculiarities of Master Philip, as they called him, in
which he differed from Luther.

#### 135.Melanchthon's "Shameful Servitude."

That Melanchthon failed our Church in the
Interim emergency as well as in the subsequent controversies
is generally ascribed to the fact that he lacked the
bracing influence and assistance of Luther. No doubt,
there is a good deal of truth in this assumption. But the
true reason why he did not measure up to the demands
of the times and the expectations of our Church were
not mere moral weaknesses, but rather the errors and
false principles to which he was wedded. How could
Melanchthon have approved himself a leader of the
Lutherans when he was out of sympathy with them,
doubted some of their most cherished doctrines, and
long ago had struck out on a path deviating from that
mapped out by Luther? True, the bracing which he
received from Luther in the past had repeatedly kept
him from publicly sacrificing the truth, but even in
these instances he did not always yield because he was
really convinced, but because he feared the uncompromising
spirit of Luther.

That fear of an open conflict with Luther which, he
felt,would result in a crushing defeat for himself, bulked
large among the motives which prompted him to maintain
a semblance of true orthodoxy as long as Luther
lived, is clearly admitted by Melanchthon himself. In his
notorious and most discreditable letter to Carlowitz
(counselor of Elector Maurice), written April 28, 1548,
eight days after the meeting at Celle, where he had
debauched his conscience by promising submission to
the religious demands of the Emperor, Melanchthon,
pouring forth his feelings and revealing his true inwardness
and his spirit of unionism and indifferentism as
much as admitted that in the past he had been accustomed
to hiding his real views. Here he declared in so
many words that it was not he who started, and was
responsible for, the religious controversy between the
Lutherans and Romanists, but rather Luther whose
contentious spirit (he said) also had constantly
increased the rupture, and that under Luther he had
suffered "a most shameful servitude."

In the original the letter reads, in part, as follows:
"Totum enim me tibi [Carlowitz] aperio.... Ego, cum
decreverit princeps etiamsi quid non probabo, tamen
nihil seditiose faciam, sed vel tacebo, vel cedam, vel
feram, quidquid accidet. cum saepe Lutherus magis
suae naturae, in qua filoneikivaerat non exigua, quam
vel personae suae vel utilitati communi serviret. Et scio,
omnibus aetatibus, ut tempestatum incommoda,ita aliqua
in gubernatione vitia modeste et arte ferenda et dissimulanda
esse.... Fortassis natura sum ingenio servili."
(C.R. 6, 879f.)

Even before Melanchthon had, in private letters to
his friends, displayed a similar vein of ill will toward
Luther, whom he evidently feared because of his own
secret doctrinal deviations. (Lehre und Wehre 1908, 61.
68.) No doubt, as stated above, fear was also among the
motives which induced him to identify himself with the
Leipzig Interim. But evidently his own theological attitude,
too, differed little from the spirit pervading this
document. At any rate, the letter to Carlowitz does not
support the assumption that Melanchthon really outraged
his own convictions when he wrote and adopted
the Interim. As a matter of fact, he also continued to
defend the Interim; and it was as late as 1556 before he
was ready to make even a qualified admission of one of
the errors connected with it.

While, therefore, the Lutheran Church will always
gratefully acknowledge the splendid services which
Melanchthon rendered in the work of Luther's
Reformation, it must at the same time be admitted and
cannot be gainsaid that, in the last analysis,
Melanchthon, by reason of his deviations from Luther,
which will be set forth more fully in the following, was
the ultimate cause and originator of most of the dissensions
which began to distract the Lutheran Church
soon after the death of Luther. Andrew Musculus, who
assisted in drafting the Formula of Concord, brought out
this fact (though in terms too strong) when he characterized
Melanchthon as a "philosophical theologian and
a patriarch of all heretics." (Meusel,Handl. 4, 710.) In a
way, Melanchthon may even be regarded as the indirect
cause of the Smalcald War and its unfortunate issue,
inasmuch, namely, as his vacillating and compromising
attitude and his incompetent leadership created conditions
of internal weakness among the Lutherans, which
invited the aggression of Pope and Emperor.

