---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XIII. The Majoristic Controversy.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 13
---

#### 142. Early Origin of This Error.

Though not personally mentioned and attacked by
the opponents of Majorism, Melanchthon must be
regarded as the real father also of this controversy. He
was the first to introduce and to cultivate the phrase:
"Good works are necessary to salvation." In his Loci of
1535 he taught that, in the article of justification, good
works are the causa sine qua non and are necessary to salvation,
ad vitam aeternam, ad salutem. (Herzog, R. E.,
1903, 12, 519; Galle,Melanchthon, 345. 134.)

Melanchthon defined: "Causa sine qua non works
nothing, nor is it a constituent part but merely something
without which the effect does not occur, or by
which, if it were not present, the working cause would
be hindered because it was not added. Causa sine qua
non nihil agit, nec est pars constituens, sed tantum est
quiddam, sine quo non fit effectus, seu quo, si non adesset,
impediretur agens, ideo quia illud non accessisset."(Preger
1, 356.) According to Melanchthon, therefore, justification
cannot occur without the presence of good works.
He explained: "Et tamen bona opera ita necessaria sunt
ad vitam aeternam, quia sequi reconciliationem necessario
debent. Nevertheless good works are necessary to
eternal life, inasmuch as they must necessarily follow
reconciliation." (C.R. 21, 429. 775.) According to the
context in which it is found, this statement includes that
good works are necessary also to justification; for
Melanchthon, too, correctly held "that the adoption to
eternal life or the gift of eternal life was connected with
justification, that is, the reconciliation imparted to
faith." (453.)

At Wittenberg Melanchthon's efforts to introduce
the new formula met with energetic opposition, especially
on the part of Cordatus and Amsdorf. The formula:
"Bona opera non quidem esse causam efficientem
salutis, sed tamen causam sine qua non-Good works
are indeed not the efficient cause of salvation, but nevertheless
an indispensable cause" a necessary
antecedent, was launched in a lecture delivered July 24,
1536, by a devoted pupil of Melanchthon, Caspar
Cruciger, Sr. [born at Leipzig, January 1, 1504; professor
in Wittenberg; assisted Luther in translating the Bible
and in taking down his lectures and sermons; present at
colloquies in Marburg 1529, in Wittenberg 1536, in
Smalcald 1537, in Worms and Hagenau 1540 in
Regensburg 1541, in Augsburg 1548; died November
16, {{< hiddenanchor 1548 >}}1548{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. According to Ratzeberger, Cruciger had dictated:
"Bona opera requiri ad salutem tamquam causam
sine qua non." Cordatus reports Cruciger's dictation as
follows: "Tantum Christus est causa propter quem; interim
tamen verum est, homines agere aliquid oportere;
oportere nos habere contritionem et debere Verbo erigere
conscientiam, ut fidem concipiamus, ut nostra contritio et
noster conatus sunt causae iustificationis sine quibus
non-our contrition and our endeavor are causes of
justification without which it does not take place." (3,
350.)

Cordatus immediately attacked the new formula as
false. "I know," said he, "that this duality of causes cannot
stand with the simple article of justification." (3,
350.) He demanded a public retraction from Cruciger.
Before long Amsdorf also entered the fray. September
14, 1536, he wrote to Luther about the new-fangled
teaching of Melanchthon, "that works are necessary to
eternal life." (3, 162; Luther, St. L. 21b, 4104.) Pressed by
Cordatus, Cruciger finally admitted that Melanchthon
was back of the phrases he had dictated. He declared
that he was the pupil of Mr. Philip; that the entire dictation
was Mr. Philip's; that by him he had been led into
this matter; and that he did not know how it happened.
"Se esse D. Philippi discipulum, et dictata omnia esse D.
Philippi, se ab eo in illam rem traductum, et nescire quomodo."
(C.R. 3, 162.)

That Melanchthon had been making efforts to
introduce the new phrases in Wittenberg appears from
the passage in his Loci of 1535 quoted above, and especially
from his letters of the two following years.
November 5, 1536, he wrote to Veit Dietrich: "Cordatus
incites the city, its neighborhood, and even the Court
against me because in the explanation of the controversy
on justification I have said that new obedience is necessary
to salvation, novam obedientiam necessariam esse
ad salutem." (185. 179.) May 16, 1537, Veit Dietrich
wrote to Forester:"Our Cordatus, driven, I know not,by
what furies,writes against Philip and Cruciger as against
heretics, and is determined to force Cruciger to retract
because he has said that good works are necessary to
salvation ... This matter worries Philip very much, and
if certain malicious men do not control themselves, he
threatens to leave." (372.) As for Melanchthon, he made
no efforts to shirk the responsibility for Cruciger's dictation.
"Libenter totam rem in me transfero-I cheerfully
transfer the entire affair to myself" he wrote April 15,
1537. Yet he was worried much more than his words
seem to indicate. (342.)

Complaints against the innovations of
Melanchthon and Cruciger were also lodged with
Luther by Cordatus, Amsdorf, and Stiefel. Cordatus
reports Luther as saying after the matter had been related
to him, October 24 1536: "This is the very theology
of Erasmus, nor can anything be more opposed to our
doctrine. Haec est ipsissima theologia Erasmi, neque
potest quidquam nostrae doctrinae esse magis adversum."
To say that new obedience is the "causa sine qua non-
sine qua non contingit vita aeterna,"Luther declared, was
tantamount to treading Christ and His blood under our
feet. "Cruciger autem haec, quae publice dictavit, publice
revocabit.What he has publicly dictated, Cruciger shall
publicly retract." (Kolde, Analecta, 266.)

According to Ratzeberger, Luther immediately
warned and censured Cruciger "in severe terms." (C.R.
4, 1038.) Flacius reports that Luther had publicly
declared more than five times: "Propositionem: Bona
opera esse necessaria ad salutem, volumus damnatam,
abrogatam, ex ecclesiis et scholis nostris penitus explosam."
(Schluesselburg 7, 567.) After his return from Smalcald,
where he had expressed grave fears as to the future doctrinal
soundness of his Wittenberg colleagues,Luther, in
a public disputation on June 1, 1537 "exploded and condemned"
the teaching that good works are necessary to
salvation, or necessary to salvation as a causa sine qua
non. (Lehre u.Wehre 1908, 65.) Both parties were present
at the disputation,Cordatus as well as Melanchthon
and Cruciger. In a letter to Veit Dietrich, June 27, 1537,
Cruciger reports: Luther maintained that new obedience
is an "effect necessarily following justification," but
he rejected the statement: "New obedience is necessary
to salvation, necessariam ad salutem." He adds: "Male
hoc habuit nostrum [Melanchthon], sed noluit eam rem
porro agitare.Melanchthon was displeased with this, but
he did not wish to agitate the matter any further." (C. R.
3, 385.) After the disputation Cruciger was handed an
anonymous note, saying that his "Treatise on Timothy"
was now branded as "heretical, sacrilegious, impious,
and blasphemous (haeretica, sacrilega, impia et blasphema),"
and unless he retracted, he would have to be
regarded as a Papist, a teacher and servant of Satan and
not of Christ, and that his dictations would be published.
(387.) In a letter to Dietrich, Cruciger remarks
that Luther had disapproved of this anonymous writing,
but he adds: "I can't see why he [Luther] gives so
much encouragement to Cordatus." (385.)

In private, Luther repeatedly discussed this matter
also with Melanchthon. This appears from their
Disputation of 1536 on the question: "Whether this
proposition is true: The righteousness of works is necessary
to salvation."(E. 58, 353.) In a letter to Dietrich of
June 22, 1537,Melanchthon, in substance, refers as follows
to his discussions with Luther: I am desirous of
maintaining the unity of the Wittenberg Academy; in
this matter I also employ some art; nor does Luther
seem to be inimical; yesterday he spoke to me in a very
kind manner on the questions raised by Quadratus
[Cordatus]. What a spectacle if the Lutherans would
oppose each other as the Cadmean brethren! I will
therefore modify whatever I can. Yet I desire a more
thorough exposition of the doctrines of predestination,
of the consent of the will, of the necessity of our obedience,
and of the sin unto death. (C.R. 3, 383.)

A number of private letters written by
Melanchthon during and immediately after his conflict
with Cordatus, however, reveal much animosity, not
only against Cordatus, but against Luther as well. Nor
do those written after Luther's disputation, June 1, 1537,
indicate that he was then fully cured of his error. (357.
392. 407.) Moreover, in his Loci of 1538 we read: "Et
tamen haec nova spiritualis obedientia (nova spiritualitas)
necessaria est ad vitam aeternam. And nevertheless
this new spiritual obedience is necessary to eternal life."
(21, 429.) Evidently, then, Melanchthon did not grasp
the matter, and was not convinced of the incorrectness
of his phraseology. Yet he made it a point to avoid and
eliminate from his publications the obnoxious formula:
"Bona opera necessaria esse ad salutem."At any rate, his
essay on Justification and Good Works, of October
1537, as well as subsequent publications of his, do not
contain it. In the Loci of 1538, just referred to, he
replaced the words bona opera by the phrase obedientia
haec nova spiritualis,-indeed, a purely verbal rather
than a doctrinal change.Nor did it reappear even in the
Variata of 1540. In 1541, at Regensburg, Melanchthon
consented to the formula "that we are justified by a living
and efficacious faith-iustificari per fidem vivam et
efficacem." But when Luther deleted the words "et efficacem,
and efficacious," Melanchthon acquiesced. (4,
499.) In the Loci of 1543 he expunged the appendix "ad
salutem, to salvation." At the same time, however, he
retained the error in a more disguised form, viz., that
good works are necessary to retain faith. For among the
reasons why good works are necessary he here enumerates
also "the necessity of retaining the faith, since the
Holy Spirit is expelled and grieved when sins against the
conscience are admitted." (21, 775.)

#### 143. Formula Renewed-Abandoned.

Under the duress of the Augsburg Interim,
Melanchthon relapsed into his old error. July 6, 1548, he
(together with Caspar Cruciger, John Pfeffinger, Daniel
Gresser, George Major, and John Foerster) agreed to the
statement:"For this proposition is certainly true that no
one can be saved without love and good works. Yet we
are not justified by love and good works, but by grace
for Christ's sake." (7, 22.) In the Leipzig Interim, adopted
several months later, the false teaching concerning
the necessity of good works to salvation was fully
restored, as appears from the quotations from this document
cited in the chapter on the Adiaphoristic
Controversy. According to the Formula of Concord this
renewal of the obnoxious formula at the time of the
Interim furnished the direct occasion for the Majoristic
Controversy. For here we read: "The aforesaid modes of
speech and false expressions [concerning the necessity
of good works to salvation] were renewed by the
Interim just at a time when there was special need of a
clear, correct confession against all sorts of corruptions
and adulterations of the article of justification." (947,
29.) However, when the controversy on good works
began, and George Major zealously championed the
restored formula, Melanchthon, probably mindful of
his former troubles in this matter, signally failed to support
and endorse his friend and colleague.Moreover, he
now advised Major and others to abstain from using the
phrase: Good works are necessary to salvation,
"because," said he, "this appendix [to salvation, ad
salutem] is interpreted as merit, and obscures the doctrine
of grace."

In an opinion of December, 1553, Melanchthon
explains:"New obedience is necessary; ... but when it is
said: New obedience is necessary to salvation, the
Papists understand that good works merit salvation.
This proposition is false, therefore I relinquish this
mode of speech." (C.R. 8, 194.) January 13, 1555, he
wrote to the Senate of Nordhausen that their ministers
"should not preach,defend, and dispute the proposition
[Good works are necessary to salvation], because it
would immediately be interpreted to mean that good
works merit salvation-weil doch alsbald diese Deutung
angehaengt wird, als sollten gute Werke Verdienst sein der
Seligkeit." (410.) September 5, 1556, he said in his letter
to Flacius: "I have always admonished George [Major]
not only to explain his sentence (which he did), but to
abandon that form of speech.And he promised that he
would not use it.What more can I ask? The same I did
with others." (842.)

In the Frankfurt Recess of 1558, written by
Melanchthon and signed by the Lutheran princes, we
read: "Although therefore this proposition,．New obedience
is necessary (Nova obedientia est necessaria, nova
obedientia est debitum),'must be retained, we nevertheless
do not wish to attach these words, ．ad salutem, to
salvation,' because this appendix is interpreted as referring
to merit and obscures the doctrine of grace, for this
remains true that man is justified before God and is an
heir of eternal salvation by grace, for the sake of the
Lord Christ, by faith in Him only." (9, 497. 405.) In an
opinion written November 13, 1559, Melanchthon
(together with Paul Eber, Pfeffinger, and U. Salmut)
again declared: "I say clearly that I do not employ the
phrase, ．Good works are necessary to salvation.' "(969.)
In his Responsiones ad Articulos Bavaricos of 1559 he
wrote: "Ego non utor his verbis: Bona opera sunt necessaria
ad salutem, quia hoc additione ．ad salutem' intelligitur
meritum. I do not use these words: Good works are
necessary to salvation, because by the addition ．to salvation'
a merit is understood." In his lectures, too,
Melanchthon frequently rejected the appendix (to salvation),
and warned his pupils not to use the phrase. (4,
543; Lehre und Wehre 1908, 78.)

Thus Melanchthon, time and again, disowned the
proposition which he himself had first introduced.
Nowhere, however, did he reject it or advise against its
use because it was inherently erroneous and false as
such but always merely because it was subject to abuse
and misapprehension,-a qualified rejection which
self-evidently could not and did not satisfy his opponents.
In an opinion, dated March 4, 1558,
Melanchthon refuses to reject flatly the controverted
formula, and endeavors to show that it is not in disagreement
with the mode of speech employed in the
Bible.We read: "Illyricus and his compeers are not satisfied
when we say that the appendix [to salvation] is to
be omitted on account of the false interpretation given
it, but demand that we simply declare the proposition,
．Good works are necessary to salvation,' to be wrong.
Against this it must be considered what also Paul has
said, Rom. 10: Confession is made to salvation
(Confessio fit ad salutem), which Wigand maliciously
alters thus: Confession is made concerning salvation
(Confessio fit de salute). Again, 2 Cor. 7: ．For godly sorrow
worketh repentance to salvation,' Likewise Phil. 2:
．Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.'
Nor do these words sound any differently: ．Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord will be saved,'Acts
2, 21. But, they say, one must understand these expressions
correctly! That is what we say, too. This disputation
however,would be ended if we agreed to eliminate
the appendix and rack our brains no further-dass wir
den Anhang ausschliessen und nicht weiter gruebelten."
(9, 474.)

#### 144.Major Champions Error.

The immediate cause of the public controversy
concerning the question whether good works are necessary
to salvation was George Major, a devoted pupil and
adherent ofMelanchthon and a most active member of
the Wittenberg faculty [Major was born April 25 1502;
1529 Rector of the school in Magdeburg; 1536
Superintendent in Eisleben; soon after, preacher and
professor in Wittenberg; 1544 Rector of the University
ofWittenberg; in 1548, at Celle, he, too, submitted to the
demands of Maurice, in the Leipzig Interim he merely
objected to the insertion of Extreme Unction; 1552
Superintendent in Eisleben; professor in Wittenberg
from 1553 until his death in {{< hiddenanchor 1574 >}}1574{{< /hiddenanchor >}}.

"That Dr. Pommer [Bugenhagen] and Dr. Major
have Caused Offense and Confusion. Nicholas Amsdorf,
Exul Christi.Magdeburg, 1551,"-such was the title of
a publication which appeared immediately prior to
Major's appointment as Superintendent in Eisleben. In
it Bugenhagen (who died 1558) and Major (of course,
Melanchthon could and should have been included)
were denounced for their connection with the Leipzig
Interim.Major in particular, was censured for having, in
the Interim, omitted the word sola, "alone," in the
phrase "sola fide justificamur, we are justified by faith
alone," and for having emphasized instead that
Christian virtues and good works are meritorious and
necessary to salvation.When, as a result of this publication
the preachers of Eisleben and Mansfeld refused to
recognize Major as their superior the latter promised to
justify himself publicly. He endeavored to do so in his
Answer published 1552 at Wittenberg, after he had
already been dismissed by Count Albrecht as
Superintendent of Eisleben. The Answer was entitled:
Auf des ehrenwuerdigen Herrn Niclas von Amsdorfs
Schrift, so jetzund neulich mense Novembri 1551 wider
Dr. Major oeffendtlich im Druck ausgegangen. Antwort
Georg Majors. In it Major disclaimed responsibility for
the Interim (although he had been present at Celle,
where it had been framed), and declared that he had
never doubted the "sola fide, by faith alone.""But," continued
Major, "I do confess that I have hitherto taught
and still teach, and henceforth will teach all my life: that
good works are necessary to salvation. And I declare
publicly and with clear and plain words that no one is
saved by evil works, and also that no one is saved without
good works. Furthermore I say, let him who teach-
es otherwise, even though an angel from heaven, be
accursed (der sei verflucht)!" Again: "Therefore it is
impossible for a man to be saved without good works."
Major explained that good works are necessary to salvation,
not because they effect or merit forgiveness of sins,
justification, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and eternal life
(for these gifts are merited alone by the death of our
only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ, and can be
received only by faith), "but nevertheless good works
must be present, not as a merit, but as due obedience
toward God." (Schlb. 7, 30.)

In his defiant attitude Major was immediately and
firmly opposed by Amsdorf, Flacius, Gallus, and others.
Amsdorf published his "Brief Instruction Concerning Dr.
Major's Answer, that he is not innocent, as he boasts. Ein
kurzer Unterricht auf Dr.Majoris Antwort, dass er nicht
unschuldig sei,wie er sich ruehmet," 1552.Major's declaration
and anathema are here met by Amsdorf as follows:
"First of all, I would like to know against whom
Dr.George Major is writing when he says:Nobody merits
heaven by evil works. Has even the angry and
impetuous Amsdorf ever taught and written thus? ...We
know well, praise God, and confess that a Christian
should and must do good works.Nobody disputes and
speaks concerning that; nor has anybody doubted this.
On the contrary, we speak and dispute concerning this,
whether a Christian earns salvation by the good works
which he should and must do ... For we all say and confess
that after his renewal and new birth a Christian
should love and fear God and do all manner of good
works, but not that he may be saved, for he is saved
already by faith (aber nicht darum, dass er selig werde,
denn er ist schon durch den Glauben selig). This is the
true prophetic and apostolic doctrine, and whoever
teaches otherwise is already accursed and damned. I,
therefore, Nicholas von Amsdorf, declare: Whoever
teaches and preaches these words as they read (Good
works are necessary to salvation), is a Pelagian, a
mameluke, and a denier of Christ, and he has the same
spirit which prompted Drs. Mensing and Witzel to
write against Dr. Luther, of blessed memory, that good
works are necessary to salvation." (Schlb. 7, 210.)

Another attack was entitled: "Against the Evangelist
of the Holy Gown, Dr. Miser Major. Wider den
Evangelisten des heiligen Chorrocks, Dr. Geitz Major,"
1552.Here Flacius-for he was the author of this publication-
maintained that neither justification, nor salvation,
nor the preservation of the state of grace is to be
based on good works. He objected to Major's propositions
because they actually made good works the
antecedent and cause of salvation and robbed
Christians of their comfort.He declared:"When we say:
That is necessary for this work or matter, it means just
as much as if we said: It is a cause, or, by this or that
work one effects this or that."As to the practical consequences
of Major's propositions, Flacius remarks: "If
therefore good works are necessary to salvation, and if it
is impossible for any one to be saved without them, then
tell us, Dr.Major, how can a man be saved who all his
life till his last breath has led a sinful life, but now when
about to die, desires to apprehend Christ (as is the case
with many on their death-bed or on the gallows)? How
will Major comfort such a poor sinner?" The poor sinner,
Flacius continues, would declare: "Major, the great
theologian, writes and teaches as most certain that no
one can be saved without good works, and that good
works are absolutely necessary (ganz notwendig) to salvation;
therefore I am damned, for I have heretofore
never done any good works." "Furthermore Major will
also have to state and determine the least number of
ounces or pounds of good works one is required to have
to obtain salvation." (Preger 1, 363f.)

In his "Explanation and Answer to the New Subtle
Corruption of the Gospel of Christ-Erklaerung und
Antwort auf die neue subtile Verfaelschung des Evangelii
Christi," 1554 Nicholas Gallus maintained that, if the
righteousness presented by Christ alone is the cause of
our justification and salvation, then good works can
only be the fruits of it. In a similar way Schnepf,
Chemnitz, and others declared themselves against
Majorism. (Schlb. 7, 55. 62. 205. 534. 572; C.R. 9, 475,
Seeberg, Dogg. 4, 486.)

#### 145.Major's Modifications.

Major answered his opponents in his book of 1553
entitled, "A Sermon on the Conversion to God of St. Paul
and All God-fearing Men." In it he most emphatically
denied that he had ever taught that good works are necessary
in order to earn salvation, and explained more
fully "whether, in what way, which, and why good works
are nevertheless necessary to salvation." Here he also
admits: "This proposition would be dangerous and
dark if I had said without any distinction and explanation:
Good works are necessary to salvation. For thus
one might easily be led to believe that we are saved by
good works without faith, or also by the merit of good
works, not by faith alone.""We are not just and saved by
renewal, and because the fulfilment of the Law is begun
in us, as the Interim teaches, but in this life we always
remain just and saved by faith alone." (Preger 1, 364ff.)

Major explains: "When I say: The new obedience or
good works which follow faith are necessary to salva-
tion, this is not to be understood in the sense that one
must earn salvation by good works, or that they constitute,
or could effect or impart the righteousness by
which a man may stand before the judgment-seat of
God, but that good works are effects and fruits of true
faith, which are to follow it [faith] and are wrought by
Christ in believers. For whoever believes and is just, he,
at the risk of losing his righteousness and salvation, is in
duty bound and obliged to begin to obey God as his
Father, to do that which is good, and to avoid evil."
(370.)

Major furthermore modified his statement by
explaining: Good works are necessary to salvation, not
in order to obtain but to retain, salvation. "In order to
retain salvation and not to lose it again," he said, "they
are necessary to such an extent that, if you fail to do
them, it is a sure indication that your faith is dead and
false, a painted faith, an opinion existing only in your
imagination."The reason, said Major (Menius, too, later
on expressed his agreement in this point with Major),
why he had urged his proposition concerning the necessity
of good works to salvation, was the fact that the
greater number also of those who claim to be good
evangelical Christians "imagine that they believe, and
imagine and fabricate a faith which may exist without
good works, though this is just as impossible as that the
sun should not emit brightness and splendor."
(Tschackert 515; Frank 2, 162. 373.)

Reducing his teaching to a number of syllogisms,
Major argued, in substance, as follows: Eternal life is
given to none but the regenerate; regeneration, however,
is new obedience and good works in the believers
and the beginning of eternal life: hence the new life,
which consists in good works, is necessary to believers
for salvation.Again:No one is saved unless he confesses
with his mouth the faith of his heart in Christ and
remains steadfast in such faith,Rom. 10, 9. 10;Matt. 22,
13; hence the works of confessing and persevering faith
are necessary to salvation as fruits of faith, in order that
salvation, obtained by faith, may not be lost by denial
and apostasy. (Frank 2, 162.) Again: The thing without
which salvation cannot be preserved is necessary to salvation;
without obedience toward God salvation,
received by grace through faith, cannot be preserved;
hence obedience toward God is necessary in order that
by it salvation, received by grace, may be preserved and
may not be lost by disobedience. At the conclusion of
his "Sermon on Paul's Conversion,"Major also repeated
his anathema against all those who teach otherwise, and
added:"Hiewider moegen nun Amseln [Amsdorf] oder
Drosseln singen und schreien,Haehne [Gallus] kraehen
oder gatzen [gakkern], verloffene und unbekannte
Wenden und Walen [Flacius] laestern, die Schrift verwenden,
verkehren, kalumniieren, schreiben und
malen,wie sie wollen, so bin ich doch gewiss, dass diese
Lehre, so in diesem Sermon steht die rechte goettliche
Wahrheit ist,wider welche auch alle hoellischen Pforten
nichts Bestaendiges oder Gruendliches koennen aufbringen,
wie boese sie sich auch machen." (Preger 1,
371. 380.)

Schluesselburg charges Major also with confounding
justification with sanctification. In proof of this he
quotes the following from Major's remarks on Rom. 8:
"Salvation or justification is twofold: one in this life and
the other in eternal life. The salvification in this life consists,
first, in the remission of sins and in the imputation
of righteousness; secondly, in the gift and renewing of
the Holy Spirit and in the hope of eternal life bestowed
freely for the sake of Christ. This salvification and justification
is only begun [in this life] and imperfect; for in
those who are saved and justified by faith there still
remains sin, the depravity of nature, there remain also
the terrors of sin and of the Law, the bite of the old
Serpent, and death, together with all miseries that flesh
is heir to. Thus by faith and the Holy Ghost we, indeed,
begin to be justified, sanctified, and saved, but we are not
yet perfectly justified, sanctified, and saved. It remains,
therefore, that we become perfectly just and saved. Sic
per fidem et Spiritum Sanctum coepimus quidem iustificari,
sanctificari, et salvari, nondum tamen perfecte
iusti et salvi sumus.Reliquum igitur est, ut perfecte iusti
et salvi fiamus." (7, 348.)

#### 146. Menius Sides with Major.

Prominent among the theologians who were in
essential agreement with Major was Justus Menius. He
was born 1499; became Superintendent in Gotha 1546;
was favorably disposed toward the Leipzig Interim;
resigned his position in Gotha 1557; removed to
Leipzig, where he published his polemical writings
against Flacius; died August 11, 1558. In 1554 he was
entangled in the Majoristic controversy. In this year
Amsdorf demanded that Menius, who, together with
himself, Schnepf, and Stolz, had been appointed visitors
of Thuringia, declare himself against the Adiaphorists,
and, in particular, reject the books of Major, and his
doctrine that good works are necessary to salvation.
Menius declined, because, he said, he had not read these
books. As a result Menius was charged with being a
secret adherent of Majorism.

In 1556, however, Menius himself proved by his
publications that this suspicion was not altogether
unwarranted. For in his Preparation for a Blessed Death
and in a Sermon on Salvation, published in that year,
Menius taught that the beginning of the new life in
believers is "necessary to salvation" (Tschackert, 517;
Herzog, R. 12, 89.) This caused Flacius to remark in his
book, Concerning the Unity of Those who in the Past
Years have Fought for and against the Adiaphora, 1556:
"Major and Menius, in their printed books, are again
reviving the error that good works are necessary to salvation,
wherefore it is to be feared that the latter misfortune
will be worse than the former." (Preger 1, 382.)
Soon after, Menius was suspended from office and
required to clear himself before the Synod in Eisenach,
1556. Here he subscribed seven propositions in which
the doctrine that good works are necessary to salvation,
or to retain salvation, was rejected.

The seven Eisenach propositions, signed by
Menius, read as follows: "1. Although this proposition,
Good works are necessary to salvation,may be tolerated
in the doctrine of the Law abstractly and ideally (in
doctrina legis abstractive et de idea tolerari potest), nevertheless
there are many weighty reasons why it should be
avoided and shunned no less than the other: Christ is a
creature. 2. In the forum of justification and salvation
this proposition, Good works are necessary to salvation,
is not at all to be tolerated. 3. In the forum of new obedience,
after reconciliation, good works are not at all
necessary to salvation but for other causes. 4.Faith alone
justifies and saves in the beginning, middle, and end. 5.
Good works are not necessary to retain salvation (ad
retinendam salutem). 6. Justification and salvation are
synonyms and equipollent or convertible terms, and
neither can nor must be separated in any way (nec ulla
ratione distrahi aut possunt aut debent). 7.May therefore
the papistical buskin be banished from our church on
account of its manifold offenses and innumerable dissensions
and other causes of which the apostles speak
Acts 15." (Preger 1, 383.)

In his subscription to these theses Menius declared:
"I, Justus Menius, testify by my present signature that
this confession is true and orthodox, and that, according
to the gift given me by God, I have heretofore by
word and writing publicly defended it, and shall continue
to defend it." In this subscription Menius also promised
to correct the offensive expressions in his Sermon
on Salvation. However, dissatisfied with the intolerable
situation thus created, he resigned, and soon after
became Superintendent in Leipzig. In three violently
polemical books, published there in 1557 and 1558, he
freely vented his long pent-up feelings of anger and animosity,
especially against Flacius. (384f.)

In these publications, Menius denied that he had
ever used the proposition of Major. However, he not
only refused to reject it, but defended the same error,
though in somewhat different terms. He merely
replaced the phrase "good works" by "new life," "new
righteousness,""new obedience," and affirmed "that it is
necessary to our salvation that such be wrought in us by
the Holy Ghost." He wrote: The Holy Spirit renews
those who have become children of God by faith in
Christ, and that this is performed in them "this, I say,
they need for their salvation-sei ihnen zur Seligkeit
vonnoeten." (Frank 2, 223.) Again:"He [the Holy Spirit]
begins righteousness and life in the believers, which
beginning is in this life (as long as we dwell on earth in
this sinful flesh) very weak and imperfect, but nevertheless
necessary to salvation, and will be perfect after the
resurrection, that we may walk in it before God eternally
and be saved."(222.) Works, said Menius,must not be
introduced into the article of justification, reconciliation,
and redemption; but when dealing with the article
of sanctification,"then it is correct to say: Sanctification,
or renewal of the Holy Spirit, is necessary to salvation."
(Preger 1, 388.)

With respect to the proposition, Good works are
necessary to salvation,Menius stated that he could not
simply condemn it as altogether false and heretical.
Moreover, he argued: "If it is correct to say:
Sanctification, or renewal by the Holy Spirit, is necessary
to salvation, then it cannot be false to say: Good
works are necessary to salvation, since it is certain and
cannot be gainsaid that sanctification and renewal do
not and cannot exist without good works." (386.)
Indeed, he himself maintained that "good works are
necessary to salvation in order that we may not lose it
again." (387. 391.) At the same time Menius, as stated
above, claimed that he had never employed Major's
proposition, and counseled others to abstain from its
use in order to avoid misinterpretation. The same
advice he gave with respect to his own formula that new
obedience is necessary to salvation. (Frank 2, 165. 223.)

Menius also confounded justification and sanctification.
He wrote: "By faith in Christ alone we become
just before God and are saved. Why? Because by faith
one receives first, forgiveness of sins and the righteousness
or obedience of Christ, with which He fulfilled the
Law for us; thereupon, one also receives the Holy Spirit,
who effects and fulfils in us the righteousness required
by the Law, here in this life imperfectly and perfectly in
the life to come." (Preger 1, 387.) At the synod of
Eisenach, 1556, the theologians accordingly declared:
"Although it is true that grace and the gift through grace
cannot be separated, but are always together, nevertheless
the gift of the Holy Spirit is not a piece or part,
much less a co-cause of justification and salvation, but
an appendix, a consequence, and an additional gift of
grace.-Wiewohl es wahr ist, dass gratia und donum per
gratiam nicht koennen getrennt werden, sondern allezeit
beieinander sind, so ist doch die Gabe des Heiligen Geistes
nicht ein Stueck oder Teil, viel weniger eine Mitursache
der Justifikation und Salvation, sondern ist ein Anhang,
Folge und Zugab be der Gnade." (Seeberg 4, 487.)

#### 147.Attitude of Anti-Majorists.

With the exception of Menius and other adherents
in Electoral Saxony, Major was firmly opposed by
Lutheran ministers and theologians everywhere. Even
when he was still their superintendent, the ministers of
Mansfeld took issue with him; and after he was dismissed
by Count Albrecht, they drafted an Opinion, in
which they declared that Major's proposition obscures
the doctrine of God's grace and Christ's merit. Also the
clergy of Luebeck, Hamburg, Lueneburg, and
Magdeburg united in an Opinion, in which they rejected
Major's proposition. Chief among the theologians
who opposed him were, as stated, Amsdorf, Flacius,
Wigand, Gallus,Moerlin and Chemnitz. In their publications
they unanimously denounced the proposition
that good works are necessary to salvation, and its
equivalents, as dangerous, godless, blasphemous, and
popish. Yet before the controversy they themselves had
not all nor always been consistent and correct in their
terminology.

The _Formula of Concord_ says: "Before this controversy
quite a few pure teachers employed such and similar
expressions [that faith is preserved by good works,
etc.] in the exposition of the Holy Scriptures, in no way,
however, intending thereby to confirm the above-mentioned
errors of the Papists." (949, 36.) Concerning the
word "faith," 1549, Flacius, for example had said that
our effort to obey God might be called a "causa sine qua
non, or something which serves salvation." His words
are: "Atque hinc apparet, quatenus nostrum studium
obediendi Deo dici possit causa sine qua non, seu
uJperetikovn ti, id est, quiddam subserviens ad
salutem." But when his attention was called to this passage,
he first eliminated the causa sine qua non and substituted
ad vitam aeternam for ad salutem, and afterwards
changed this phrase into ad veram pietatem.
(Frank 2, 218. 169.) However, as soon as the controversy
began, the Lutherans, notably Flacius, clearly saw the
utter falsity of Major's statements.

Flacius wrote: "Salvation is forgiveness of sins, as
Paul testifies,Rom.4, and David,Ps. 32:．Blessed are they
whose sins are forgiven.' ．Thy faith hath made thee
whole.'Matt. 9;Mark 5. 10, Luke 7. 8. 18. Jesus saves sinners
and the lost.Matt. 1, 18; 1 Tim. 1. Since, now, salvation
and forgiveness of sins are one and the same
thing, consider, dear Christian, what kind of doctrine
this is: No one has received forgiveness of sins without
good works; it is impossible for any one to receive forgiveness
of sins or to be saved without good works;
good works are necessary to forgiveness of sins." (Preger
1, 375.) Again: "Young children and those who are converted
in their last hour (who certainly constitute the
greater part),must confess that they neither possess, nor
will possess, any good works, for they die forthwith.
Indeed, St. Bernard also wrote when on his deathbed:
Perdite vixi-I have led a wicked life! And what is still
more, all Christians, when in their dying moments, they
are striving with sins,must say: ．All our good works are
like filthy rags; in my life there is nothing good;' and, as
David says, Ps. 51: ．Before Thee I am nothing but sin,' as
Dr. Luther explains it." (376.) Again: "We are concerned
about this, that poor and afflicted consciences may have
a firm and certain consolation against sin, death, devil,
and hell, and thus be saved. For if a condition or appendix
concerning our good works and worthiness is
required as necessary to salvation, then, as Dr. Major
frequently discusses this matter very excellently, it is
impossible to have a firm and solid consolation." (376.)

Flacius showed that Major's proposition taken as it
reads, can be interpreted only in a papistical sense, and
that no amount of explanations is able to cure it of its
ingrained falsity. Major, said he, must choose between
his proposition or the interpretations which he places
upon it; for the former does not admit of the latter.He
added that a proposition which is in constant need of
explanations in order not to be misunderstood is not
adapted for religious instruction. From the fact, says
Flacius, that the justified are obliged to obey the Law, it
follows indeed that good works are necessary, but not
that they are necessary to salvation (as Major and
Menius inferred). "From the premises [that Christians
are in duty bound to obey the Law and to render the
new obedience] it merely follows that this obedience is
necessary; but nothing is here said of salvation." (392.)
Flacius showed that Major's proposition, even with the
proviso that each and every merit of works was to be
excluded, remained objectionable. The words "necessary
to, necessaria ad," always, he insisted, designate
something that precedes, moves, works, effects. The
proposition: Justification, salvation, and faith are necessary
to good works, cannot be reversed, because good
works are not antecedents, but consequents of justification,
salvation, and faith.

For the same reason Flacius objected to the phrase
that good works are necessary as causa sine qua non.
"Dear Dr. G." (Major), says he, "ask the highly learned
Greek philosophers for a little information as to what
they say de causa sine qua non, w.n oujk a[neu. Ask I say,
the learned and the unlearned, ask philosophy, reason,
and common languages, whether it is not true that it
[causa sine qua non] must precede." (377.) No one, said
he would understand the propositions of Major and
Menius correctly. Illustrating this point Flacius wrote:
"Can one become a carpenter without the house which
he builds afterwards? Can one make a wagon or ship
without driving or sailing? I say, yes! Or,dear Doctor, are
we accustomed to say: Driving and sailing is necessary
to the wagon and ship respectively, and it is impossible
for a wagon or ship to be made without driving or sailing?
I hear: No!" (375.) "Nobody says: Fruits and leaves
are necessary to the tree; wine and grapes are necessary
to the vineyard; or dwelling is necessary to a house; driving
and sailing, to a wagon and ship; riding is necessary
to a horse; but thus they speak:Wagons and horses are
necessary to riding, a ship is necessary to sailing." (391.)

The charge that Major's proposition robbed
Christians of their assurance of salvation was urged also
by Nicholas Gallus. He says: It is giving with one hand
and taking again with the other when Major adds [to
his proposition concerning the necessity of good works
to salvation] that our conscience is not to look upon our
works, but on Christ alone. (Frank 2, 224.) The same
point was stressed in the Opinion of the ministers of
Luebeck, Hamburg, Lueneburg, and Magdeburg, published
by Flacius and Gallus in 1553. (220.) The
Hamburg theologians declared: "This appendix [necessary
to salvation, ad salutem] indicates a cause and a
merit."They added that in this sense also the phrase was
generally understood by the Papists. (Planck,Geschichte
des prot. Lehrbegriffes 5, 505. 497.) Gallus also explained
that it was papistical to infer: By sins we lose salvation,
hence it is retained by good works; or, Sins condemn,
hence good works save. (Frank 2, 171.) Hesshusius
wrote to Wigand: "I regard Eber's assertion that good
works are necessary to justification because they must be
present, as false and detrimental. For Paul expressly
excludes good works from the justification of a sinner
before God, not only when considered a merit cause,
glory, dignity, price, object or trust, and medium of
application, etc., but also as to the necessity of their presence
(verum etiam quoad necessitatem praesentiae). If it
is necessary that good works be present with him who
is to be justified, then Paul errs when he declares that a
man is justified without the works of the Law." (172.)

Regarding this point, that good works are necessary
to justification in so far as they must be present, the
Majorists appealed to Luther, who, however, had merely
stated that faith is never alone, though it alone justifies.
His axiom was: "Faith alone justifies, but it is not
alone-Fides sola iustificat, sed non est sola." According
to Luther good works, wherever they are found, are
present in virtue of faith; where they are not present,
they are absent because faith is lacking; nor can they
preserve the faith by which alone they are produced.At
the Altenburg Colloquy (1568 to 1569) the theologians
of Electoral Saxony insisted that, since true faith does
not and cannot exist in those who persevere in sins
against their conscience, good works must not be altogether
and absolutely excluded from justification, at
least their necessity and presence must not be regarded
as unnecessary. (189.) The theologians of Ducal Saxony,
however, denied "that in the article and act of justification
our good works are necessary by necessity of presence.
Sed impugnamus istam propositionem, in articulo
et actu iustificationis bona nostra opera necessaria esse
necessitate praesentiae." "On the other hand, however,
they, too, were solicitous to affirm the impossibility of
faith's coexisting with an evil purpose to sin against God
in one and the same mind at the same time." (237;
Gieseler 3, 2, 251.) In the Apology of the Book of Concord
the Lutheran theologians declared: "The proposition
(Justification of faith requires the presence of good
works) was rejected [in the Formula of Concord]
because it cannot be understood otherwise than of the
cause of justification. For whatever is present in justification
as necessary in such a manner that without its
presence justification can neither be nor occur, that
must indeed be understood as being a cause of justification
itself." (238)

#### 148.Major's Concessions Not Satisfactory.

In order to put an end to the controversy, Major
offered a concession in his "Confession concerning the
Article of Justification, that is, concerning the doctrine
that by faith alone, without any merit, for the sake of
Christ, a man has forgiveness of sins, and is just before
God and an heir of eternal salvation," 1558. Here he
states that he had not used the controverted formula for
several years and, in order not to give further cause for
public contention, he promised "not to employ the
words, ．Good works are necessary to salvation,' any
more, on account of the false interpretations placed
upon it." (Preger 1, 396.) In making this concession,
however,Major did not at all intend to retract his teaching
or to condemn his proposition as false.He promised
to abstain from its use, not because he was now convinced
of his error and viewed his propositions as false
and incorrect as such, but merely because it was
ambiguous and liable to abuse, and because he wished
to end the conflict. (Frank 2, 166f. 223.)

Nor did Major later on ever admit that he had erred
in the matter. In an oration delivered 1567 he boasted of
his intimate relation and doctrinal agreement with
Luther and Melanchthon, adding: "Neither did I ever
deviate, nor, God assisting me, shall I ever deviate, from
the truth once acknowledged. Nec discessi umquam nec
Deo iuvante discedam ab agnita semel veritate." He had
never thought or taught, said he, that good works are a
cause of justification. And concerning the proposition,
"Good works are necessary to salvation," he had
expressly declared that he intended to abstain from its
use "because it had offended some on account of its
ambiguity, cum propter ambiguitatem offenderit aliquos."
He continued: "The facts show that we [the professors
of Wittenberg University] are and have remained
guardians of that doctrine which Luther and
Melanchthon ... delivered to us, in whose writings from
the time of the [Augsburg] Confession there is neither a
dissonance nor a discrepancy, either among themselves
or from the foundation, nor anything obscure or perplexing."
(Frank 2, 224. 167.)

Also in his Testament (Testamentum Doctoris
Georgii Majoris), published 1570, Major emphatically
denied that he had ever harbored or taught any false
views concerning justification, salvation, and good
works. Of his own accord he had also abandoned the
phrases: "Good works are necessary to salvation; it is
impossible to be saved without good works; no one has
ever been saved without good works-Bona opera sunt
necessaria ad salutem; impossibile est, sine bonis operibus
salvum fieri; nemo umquam sine bonis operibus salvatus
est."He had done this in order to obviate the misapprehension
as though he taught that good works are a
cause of salvation which contribute to merit and effect
salvation. According to this Testament, he desired his
doctrines and writings to be judged. In future he would
not dispute with anybody about these phrases. (168.)
Thus in his Testament, too, Major withdrew his statements
not because they were simply false, but only
because they had been interpreted to mean that good
works are the efficient cause of justification and salvation.
And while Major in later writings did eliminate the
appendix "ad salutem, to salvation," or "ad vitam aeternam,
to eternal life,"he retained, and continued to teach,
essentially the same error in another garb, namely, that
good works are necessary in order to retain faith.
Enumerating, in his Explanation of the Letter to the
Galatians, of 1560, the purposes on account of which
good works ought to be rendered, he mentions as the
"first, in order to retain faith, the Holy Spirit, the grace
bestowed, and a good conscience." (218.)

Thus Major was willing to abandon as dangerous
and ambiguous, and to abstain from the use of the formula,
"Good works are necessary to salvation," but
refused to reject it as false and to make a public admission
and confession of his error. This, however, was precisely
what his opponents demanded; for they were
convinced that they could be satisfied with nothing less.
As a result the controversy continued till Major's death,
in 1574. The Jena professors, notably Flacius, have been
charged with prolonging the controversy from motives
of personal revenge. (Schaff, 276.) No doubt, the
Wittenbergers had gone to the very limit of rousing the
animosity and resentment of Flacius (who himself,
indeed, was not blameless in the language used against
his opponents) .Major had depicted Flacius as a most
base and wicked man, as a cunning and sly adventurer;
as a tyrant, who, after having suppressed the
Wittenbergers, would, as a pope, lord it over all
Germany; as an Antinomian and a despiser of all good
works, etc. (Preger 1 397.) In the address of October 18,
1567 already referred to,Major said: "There was in this
school [Wittenberg] a vagabond of uncertain origin,
fatherland, religion, and faith who called himself Flacius
Illyricus....He was the first one to spew out against this
school, against its principal Doctors, against the churches
of these_ee ______________the princes themselves,
the poison which he had brewed and imbibed some
time ago, and, having gnawed and consumed with the
bite of a serpent the womb of his mother, to destroy the
harmony of these churches, at first by spreading his
dreams, fables, and gossip but now also by calumnies
and manifest lies." (Frank 2, 217.) Melanchthon, too,
had repeatedly written in a similar vein. In an Opinion
of his, dated March 4, 1558, we read: "Even if they
[Flacius and his adherents] condemn and banish me, I
am well satisfied; for I do not desire to associate with
them, because I well know that the said Illyricus with his
adherents does not seek the honor of God, but publicly
opposes the truth, and as yet has never declared himself
concerning the entire sum of Christian doctrine." (C.R.
9, 463. 476. 311.) In an Opinion of March 9, 1559,
Melanchthon even insinuated that Flacius denied the
Trinity. (763.) Before this, August, 1549, he had written
to Fabricius: "The Slavic runagate (Slavus drapevth")
received many benefits from our Academy and from
me. But we have nursed a serpent in our bosom. He
deserves to be branded on his forehead as the
Macedonian king did with a soldier: ．Ungrateful
stranger, xevno" ajcavristo".' Nor do I believe that the
source of his hatred is any other than that the place of
Cruciger was not given to him. But I omit these disagreeable
narrations." (7, 449. 478ff.) This personal
abuse, however, was not the reason why Flacius persisted
in his opposition despite the concessions made by
Major and Menius,-concessions with which even such
moderate men as Martin Chemnitz were not satisfied.

Flacius continued his opposition because he could
not do otherwise without sacrificing his own principles,
compromising the truth, and jeopardizing the doctrine
of justification.He did not yield because he was satisfied
with nothing less than a complete victory of the divine
truth and an unqualified retraction of error. The truly
objective manner in which he dealt with this matter
appears from his Strictures on the Testament ofDr.Major
(Censura de Testamento D. Majoris). Here we read, in
substance: In his TestamentMajor covers his error with
the same sophism which he employed in his former
writings. For he says that he ascribes the entire efficient
cause, merit, and price of our justification and salvation
to Christ alone, and therefore excludes and removes all
our works and virtues. This he has set forth more fully
and more clearly in his previous writings, saying that
the proposition, "Good works are necessary to salvation,"
can be understood in a double sense; viz., that
they are necessary to salvation as a certain merit, price,
or efficient cause of justification or salvation (as the
Papists understand and teach it), or that they are necessary
to salvation as a certain debt or an indispensable
cause (causa sine qua non), or a cause without which it
is impossible for the effect of salvation to follow or for
any one to obtain it. He now confesses this same opinion.
He does not expressly eliminate "the indispensable
cause, or the obligation without the fulfilment of which
it is impossible for any one to be preserved, as he asserted
repeatedly before this, from which it appears that he
adheres to his old error. Et non diserte tollit causam sine
qua non seu debitum, sine cuius persolutione sit impossibile
quemquam servari, quod toties antea asseruit; facile
patet, eum pristinum illum suum errorem retinere."
(Schlb. 7, 266; Preger 1, 398.) Flacius demanded an
unqualified rejection of the statement,"Good works are
necessary to salvation"-a demand with which Major
as well as Melanchthon refused to comply. (C.R. 9,
474f.)

The Formula of Concord, however, sanctioned the
attitude of Flacius. It flatly rejected the false and dubious
formulas ofMelanchthon,Major, and Menius concerning
the necessity of good works to salvation, and fully
restored Luther's doctrine. Luther's words concerning
"good works" are quoted as follows: "We concede
indeed that instruction should be given also concerning
love and good works, yet in such a way that this be done
when and where it is necessary, namely,when otherwise
and outside of this matter of justification we have to do
with works. But here the chief matter dealt with is the
question not whether we should also do good works
and exercise love, but by what means we can be justified
before God and saved. And here we answer with St.
Paul: that we are justified by faith in Christ alone, and
not by the deeds of the Law or by love.Not that we hereby
entirely reject works and love, as the adversaries falsely
slander and accuse us, but that we do not allow ourselves
to be led away, as Satan desires, from the chief
matter, with which we have to do here, to another and
foreign affair, which does not at all belong to this matter.
Therefore, whereas and as long as we are occupied
with this article of justification, we reject and condemn
works, since this article is so constituted that it can
admit of no disputation or treatment whatever regarding
works. Therefore in this matter we cut short all Law
and works of the Law." (925, 29.)

The Formula of Concord rejects the Majoristic formula,
not because it is ambiguous, but because it is false.
Concerning ambiguous phrases it declares: "To avoid
strife about words, aequivocationes vocabulorum, i.e.,
words and expressions which are applied and used in
various meanings, should be carefully and distinctly
explained." (875, 51.) An ambiguous phrase or statement
need not be condemned, because it may be made
immune from error and misapprehension by a careful
explanation. The statement,"Good works are necessary
to salvation," however, does not admit of such treatment.
It is inherently false and cannot be cured by any
amount of explanation or interpretation. Because of
this inherent falsity it must be rejected as such. Logically
and grammatically the phrase, "Good works are necessary
to salvation," reverses the correct theological order,
by placing works before faith and sanctification before
justification. It turns things topsy-turvy. It makes the
effect the cause; the consequent, the antecedent, and vice
versa.

Not personal animosity, but this fundamental falsity
of the Majoristic formula was, in the last analysis, the
reason why the explanations and concessions made by
Major and Menius did not and could not satisfy their
opponents. They maintained, as explained above, that
the words "necessary to" always imply "something that
precedes, moves, effects, works," and that, accordingly,
the obnoxious propositions ofMajor "place good works
before the remission of sins and before salvation."
(Preger 1, 377.) Even Planck admits that only force
could make the proposition,"Good works are necessary
to salvation," say, "Good works must follow faith and
justification." "According to the usage of every language,"
says he,"a phrase saying that one thing is necessary
to another designates a causal connection.
Whoever dreamt of asserting that heat is necessary to
make it day, because it is a necessary effect of the rays of
the sun, by the spreading of which it becomes day." (4,
542. 485.) Without compromising the truth and jeopardizing
the doctrine of justification, therefore, the
Lutherans were able to regard as satisfactory only a clear
and unequivocal rejection of Majorism as it is found in
the Formula of Concord.

#### 149.Absurd Proposition of Amsdorf.

Nicholas Amsdorf, the intimate and trusted friend
of Luther, was among the most zealous of the opponents
of Majorism. He was born December 3, 1483;
professor in Wittenberg; 1521 in Worms with Luther;
superintendent in Magdeburg; 1542 bishop at
Naumburg; banished by Maurice in 1547, he removed
to Magdeburg; soon after professor and superintendent
in Jena; opposed the Interimists, Adiaphorists,
Osiandrists, Majorists, Synergists, Sacramentarians,
Anabaptists, and Schwenckfeldians; died at Eisenach
May 14 1565.Regarding the bold statements ofMajor as
a blow at the very heart of true Lutheranism, Amsdorf
antagonized his teaching as a "most pernicious error,"
and denounced Major as a Pelagian and a double Papist.
But, alas, the momentum of his uncontrolled zeal carried
him a step too far-over the precipice.He declared
that good works are detrimental and injurious to salvation,
bona opera perniciosa (noxia) esse ad salutem. He
defended his paradoxical statement in a publication of
1559 against Menius, with whose subscription to the
Eisenach propositions, referred to above, he was not satisfied;
chiefly because Menius said there that he had
taught and defended them also in the past. The flagrant
blunder of Amsdorf was all the more offensive because
it appeared on the title of his tract, reading as follows:
"Dass diese Propositio: ．Gute Werke sind zur Seligkeit
schaedlich,' eine rechte, wahre christliche Propositio sei,
durch die heiligen Paulum und Lutherum gelehrt und
gepredigt. Niclas von Amsdorf, 1559. That this proposition,．
Good works are injurious to salvation,' is a correct,
true, Christian proposition taught and preached by Sts.
Paul and Luther." (Frank 2, 228.)

Luther, to whose writings Amsdorf appealed, had
spoken very guardedly and correctly in this matter. He
had declared: Good works are detrimental to the righteousness
of faith, "if one presumes to be justified by
them, si quis per ea praesumat iustificari." Wherever
Luther speaks of the injuriousness of good works, it is
always sub specie iustificationis, that is to say, viewing
good works as entering the article of justification, or the
forgiveness of sins. (Weimar 7, 59; 10, 3, 373. 374. 387;
E. 16, 465. 484; Tschackert, 516.) What vitiated the
proposition as found in Amsdorf's tract was the fact
that he had omitted the modification added by Luther.
Amsdorf made a flat statement of what Luther had
asserted, not flatly, nude et simpliciter, but with a limitation,
secundum quid.

Self-evidently the venerable Amsdorf, too, who
from the very beginning of the Reformation had set an
example in preaching as well as in living a truly
Christian life, did not in the least intend to minimize, or
discourage the doing of, good works by his offensive
phrase, but merely to eliminate good works from the
article of justification. As a matter of fact, his extravagant
statement, when taken as it reads, flatly contradicted
his own clear teaching. In 1552 he had declared
against Major, as recorded above: "Who has ever taught
or said that one should or need not do good works?"
"For we all say and confess that after his renewal and
new birth a Christian should love and fear God and do
all manner of good works," etc.What Amsdorf wished
to emphasize was not that good works are dangerous in
themselves and as such, but in the article of salvation.
For this reason he added: "ad salutem, to salvation." By
this appendix he meant to emphasize that good works
are dangerous when introduced as a factor in justification
and trusted in for one's salvation.

Melanchthon refers to the proposition of Amsdorf
as "filthy speech, unflaetige Rede." In 1557, at Worms, he
wrote: "Now Amsdorf writes: Good works are detrimental
to salvation.... The Antinomians and their like
must avoid the filthy speech, ．Good works are detrimental
to salvation.' " (C. R. 9, 405ff.) Though unanimously
rejecting his blundering proposition,Amsdorf's
colleagues treated the venerable veteran of Lutheranism
with consideration and moderation. No one, says
Frank, disputed the statement in the sense in which
Amsdorf took it, and its form was so apparently false
that it could but be generally disapproved. (2, 176.) The
result was that the paradox assertion remained without
any special historical consequences.

True, Major endeavored to foist Amsdorf's teaching
also on Flacius.He wrote: Flacius "endeavors with all his
powers to subvert this proposition, that good works are
necessary to those who are to be saved; and tries to
establish the opposite blasphemy, that good works are
dangerous to those who are to be saved, and that they
area hindrance to eternal salvation-evertere summis
viribus hanc propositionem conatur: bona opera salvandis
esse necessaria. Ac contra stabilire oppositam blasphemiam
studet: Bona opera salvandis periculosa sunt et aeternae
saluti officiunt."Major continues: "Let pious minds
permit Flacius and his compeers, at their own risk, to
prostitute their eternal salvation to the devils, and by
their execrations and anathemas to sacrifice themselves
to the devil and his angels." (Frank 2, 221.) This, however,
was slander pure and simple, for Flacius was
among the first publicly to disown Amsdorf when he
made his extravagant statement against Menius. (Preger
1, 392. 384.)

The Formula of Concord most emphatically rejects
the error of Amsdorf (the bare statement that good
works are injurious to salvation) "as offensive and detrimental
to Christian discipline." And justly so; for the
question was not what Amsdorf meant to say: but what
he really did say. The Formula adds: "For especially in
these last times it is no less, needful to admonish men to
Christian discipline and good works, and remind them
how necessary it is that they exercise themselves in good
works as a declaration of their faith and gratitude to
God, than that works be not mingled in the article of
justification; because men may be damned by an
Epicurean delusion concerning faith, as well as by papistic
and Pharisaical confidence in their own works and
merits." (801, 18.)

#### 150. Other Points of Dispute.

Is it correct to say: God requires good works, or,
Good works are necessary, and, Christians are obliged
or in duty bound to do good works (bona opera sunt
necessaria et debita) ? This q uestion, too, was a point of
dispute in the Majoristic controversy. Originally the
controversy concerning these terms and phrases was a
mere logomachy, which, however, later on (when, after
the error lurking in the absolute rejection of them had
been pointed out, the phrases were still flatly condemned),
developed into a violent controversy. The
Formula of Concord explains:"It has also been argued by
some that good works are not necessary (noetig), but are
voluntary (freiwillig), because they are not extorted by
fear and the penalty of the Law, but are to be done from
a voluntary spirit and a joyful heart. Over against this
the other side contended that good works are necessary.
This controversy was originally occasioned by the words
necessitas and libertas ["notwendig" und "frei"], that is,
necessary and free, because especially the word necessitas,
necessary, signifies not only the eternal, immutable
order according to which all men are obliged and in
duty bound to obey God, but sometimes also a coercion,
by which the Law forces men to good works. But
afterwards there was a disputation not only concerning
the words, but the doctrine itself was attacked in the
most violent manner, and it was contended that the new
obedience in the regenerate is not necessary because of
the above-mentioned divine order." (939, 4f.)

From the very beginning of the Reformation the
Romanists had slandered Luther also by maintaining
that he condemned good works and simply denied their
necessity. A similar charge was made by the Majorists
against their opponents generally. And Melanchthon's
writings, too, frequently create the same impression.But
it was an inference of their own. They argued: If good
works are not necessary to salvation, they cannot be
necessary at all.Wigand wrote: "It is a most malicious
and insidious trait in the new teachers [the Majorists]
that they, in order to gloss over their case, cry out with
the Papists that the controversy is whether good works
are necessary. But this is not in dispute, for no Christian
ever denied it. Good works are necessary; that is certainly
true. But the conflict arises from the appendix
attached to it, and the patch pasted to it, viz., ．to salvation.'
And here all God-fearing men say that it is a detrimental,
offensive, damnable, papistic appendix."
(Planck 4, 498. 544.)

It is true, however, that the Antinomians (who will
be dealt with more extensively in a following chapter) as
well as several other opponents of the Majorists were
unwilling to allow the statement,"Good works are necessary."
Falsely interpreting the proposition as necessarily
implying, not merely moral obligation, but also compulsion
and coercion, they rejected it as unevangelical
and semipopish. The word "must" is here not in place,
they protested.Agricola, as well as the later Antinomians
(Poach and Otto), rejected the expressions "necessarium,
necessary" and "duty, debitum," when employed in
connection with good works. January 13, 1555,
Melanchthon wrote: "Some object to the words, ．Good
works are necessary,' or, ．One must do good works.'
They object to the two words necessitas and debitum.
And the Court-preacher [Agricola] at that time juggled
with the word must: ．das Muss ist versalzen.' He understood
necessarium and debitum as meaning, coerced by
fear of punishment, extortum coactione (extorted by
coercion), and spoke high-sounding words, such as,
how good works came without the Law. Yet the first
meaning of necessarium and debitum is not extortum
coactione,but the eternal and immutable order of divine
wisdom; and the Lord Christ and Paul themselves
employ these words necessarium and debitum." In
December, 1557, he wrote: "They [the Antinomians]
object to the proposition: ．New obedience is necessary;'
again: ．New obedience is a debt (debitum).' And now
Amsdorf writes: ．Good works are detrimental to salvation,'
and it was Eisleben's [Agricola's] slogan: ．Das Muss
ist versalzen.' In Nordhausen some one has publicly
announced a disputation which contains the proposition:
．Summa ars Chriatianorum est nescire legem. The
highest art of a Christian is not to know the Law.' "
March 4, 1558: "Some, for instance, Amsdorf and
Gallus, object to the word debitum." (C.R. 8, 411. 194.
842; 9, 405. 474.)

Andrew Musculus, professor in Frankfurt on the
Oder, is reported to have said in a sermon, 1558: "They
are all the devil's own who teach:．New obedience is necessary
(nova obedientia est necessaria)'; the word ．must
(necessary)' does not belong here.．Good works are necessary
to salvation,' and, ．Good works are necessary, but
not to salvation'-these are both of a cloth-das sind
zwei Hosen aus einem Tuch." (Meusel, Handlexikon 4,
710; Gieseler 3, 2, 216.)

Over against this extreme position, Melanchthon,
Flacius, Wigand, Moerlin, and others held that it was
entirely correct to say that good works are necessary. In
the Opinion of November 13, 1559, referred to above,
Melanchthon, after stating that he does not employ the
phrase,"Good works are necessary to salvation,"continues
as follows: "But I do affirm that these propositions
are true, and that one may properly and without
sophistry say, ．The new obedience or good works are
necessary,'because obedience is due to God and because
it is necessary that, after the Holy Spirit has been
received, regeneration or conversion be followed by
motions corresponding to the Holy Spirit ... And the
words ．duty' and ．necessity' signify the order of God's
wisdom and justice; they do not signify an obedience
which is compelled or extorted by fear." (C.R. 9, 969.)
The Frankfurt Rezess of 1558 [Rezess, Rueckzug,
Vergleich = Agreement], written by Melanchthon and
signed by the Lutheran princes, declared:"These propositions,
．Nova obedientia est necessaria, nova obedientia
est debitum,New obedience is necessary, is a debt,' shall
not be rejected." The Rezess explained: "It is certainly a
divine, immovable truth that new obedience is necessary
in those who are justified; and these words are to be
retained in their true meaning. ．Necessary' signifies
divine order. New obedience is necessary and is a debt
for the very reason that it is an immutable divine order
that the rational creature obeys God." (C.R. 9, 496. 498.)

In a similar way this matter was explained by
Flacius and other theologians. They all maintained that
it is correct to say, Good works are necessary. Even
Amsdorf wrote 1552 in his Brief Instruction against
Major: "For we all say and confess that a Christian after
his renewal and new birth should and must (soll und
muss) love and fear God and do all manner of good
works, but not in order to be saved thereby, for he is
saved already by faith." (Schlb. 7, 210.) This view,which
was also plainly taught in the Augsburg Confession, prevailed
and received the sanction of our Church in
Article IV of the Formula of Concord.When a Christian
spontaneously and by the free impulse of his own faith
does (and would do, even if there were no law at all)
what, according to the holy will of God, revealed in the
Ten Commandments, he is obliged and in duty bound
to do-such works, and such only, are, according to the
Formula ofConcord, truly good works,works pleasing to
God. It was the doctrine of Luther, who had written, e.
g., in his Church Postil of 1521:"No, dear man, you [cannot
earn heaven by your good works, but you] must
have heaven and already be saved before you do good
works.Works do not merit heaven, but, on the contrary,
heaven, imparted by pure grace, does good works spontaneouslv,
seeking no merit, but only the welfare of the
neighbor and the glory of God. Nein, lieber Mensch, du
musst den Himmel haben und schon selig sein, ehe du
gute Werke tust. Die Werke verdienen nicht den Himmel,
sondern wiederum [umgekehrt], der Himmel, aus lauter
Gnaden gegeben, tut die guten Werke dahin, ohne Gesuch
des Verdienstes, nur dem Naechsten zu Nutz und Gott zu
Ehren." (E. 7, 174.) Again, in De Servio Arbitrio of 1525:
"The children of God do good entirely voluntarily, seeking
no reward, but only the glory and will of God, ready
to do the good even if, assuming the impossible, there
were neither heaven nor hell. Filii autem Dei gratuita
voluntate faciunt bonum, nullum praemium quaerentes,
sed solam gloriam et voluntatem Dei, parati bonum
facere, si per impossibile neque regnum neque infernus
esset." (E. v. a. 7, 234.)

