---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XIV. The Synergistic Controversy.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 14
---

#### 151. Relation of Majorism and Synergism.

The theological connection between Majorism and
synergism is much closer than is generally realized.Both
maintain that, in part, or in a certain respect, salvation
depends not on grace alone, but also on man and his
efforts. The Majorists declared good works to be necessary
to salvation, or at least to the preservation of faith
and of salvation.Thus salvation would, in a way,depend
on the right conduct of a Christian after his conversion.
The Synergists asserted: Man, too, must do his bit and
cooperate with the Holy Spirit if he desires to be saved.
Conversion and salvation, therefore, would depend, at
least in part, on man's conduct toward converting grace,
and he would be justified and saved, not by grace alone,
but by a faith which to a certain extent is a work of his
own. The burden of both,Majorism and synergism,was
the denial of the sola gratia. Both coordinated man and
God as the causes of our salvation. Indeed, consistently
carried out, both destroyed the central Christian truth
of justification by grace alone and,with it, the assurance
of a gracious God and of eternal salvation-the
supreme religious concern of Luther and the entire
Lutheran theology.

Majorists and Synergists employed also the same
line of argument. Both derived their doctrine, not from
any clear statements of the Bible, but by a process of
anti-Scriptural and fallacious reasoning. The Majorists
inferred: Since evil works and sins against conscience
destroy faith and justification, good works are required
for their preservation. The Synergists argued: Since all
who are not converted or finally saved must blame, not
God, but themselves for rejecting grace, those, too, who
are converted must be credited with at least a small
share in the work of their salvation, that is to say,with a
better conduct toward grace than the conduct of those
who are lost.

However, while Majorism as well as synergism, as
stated, represented essentially the same error and
argued against the doctrine of grace in the same
unscriptural manner, the more subtle, veiled, and hence
the more dangerous of the two, no doubt, was synergism,
which reduced man's cooperation to a seemingly
harmless minimum and, especially in the beginning,
endeavored to clothe itself in ambiguous phrases and
apparently pious and plausible formulas. Perhaps this
accounts also for the fact that, though Melanchthon and
the Majorists felt constrained to abandon as described
in the preceding chapter, the coarser and more offensive
Majoristic propositions, they had at the same time no
compunctions about retaining and defending essentially
the same error in their doctrine of conversion; and
that, on the other hand, their opponents, who by that
time fully realized also the viciousness of synergism,
were not satisfied with Major's concessions in the controversy
on good works, because he and his colleagues
in Wittenberg were known to identify themselves with
the Synergists. For the same reason the dangerous error
lurking in the synergistic phrases does not seem from
the first to have been recognized by the Lutherans in the
same degree as was the error contained in the Majoristic
propositions, which indeed had even during Luther's
life to some extent become a subject of dispute. Yet it
seems hardly possible that for years they should not
have detected the synergistic deviations in Wittenberg
from Luther's doctrine of free will. Perhaps the fact that
at the time when Melanchthon came out boldly with his
synergism, 1548, the Lutherans were engrossed with the
Adiaphoristic and Majoristic controversies may help to
explain, at least to some extent,why the synergistic error
caused small concern, and was given but little consideration
in the beginning. As a matter of fact, although a
considerable amount of synergistic material had been
published by 1548, the controversy did not begin till
1556, while the error that good works are necessary to
salvation was publicly opposed soon after its reappearance
in the Leipzig Interim.At the Weimar Disputation,
1560, Strigel referred to this silence, saying: "I am astonished
that I am pressed so much in this matter [concerning
synergism], since three years ago at Worms no
mention whatever [?] was made of this controversy,
while many severe commands were given regarding
others." (Richard, Conf. Prin., 349.) The matter was
mentioned at Worms, but Melanchthon is reported to
have satisfied Brenz and others by declaring that in the
passages of his Loci suspected of synergism he meant
"the regenerated will."

#### 152. Luther's Monergism.

According to Lutheran theology, the true opposite
of synergism is not Calvinism with its double election,
irresistible grace, denial of universal redemption, etc.,
but the monergism of grace, embracing particularly the
tenets that in consequence of Adam's fall man is spiritually
dead and utterly unable to contribute in any degree
or manner toward his own justification and conversion;
moreover, that, being an enemy of God, man, of his
own natural powers, is active only in resisting the saving
efforts of God, as well as able and prone only to do so;
that God alone and in every respect is the Author of
man's conversion, perseverance, and final salvation; and
that, since the grace of God is universal and earnestly
proffered, man alone is responsible for, and the cause of,
his own damnation.

"Sola fides iustificat, Faith alone justifies"-that was
the great slogan of the Reformation sounded forth by
Luther and his followers with ever increasing boldness,
force and volume. And the distinct meaning of this
proposition, which Luther called "hoc meum dogma,
this my dogma," was just this, that we are saved not by
any effort or work of our own, but in every respect by
God's grace alone. The restoration of this wonderful
truth, taught by St. Paul, made Luther the Reformer of
the Church. This truth alone, as Luther had experienced,
is able to impart solid comfort to a terror-stricken
conscience, engender divine assurance of God's pardon
and acceptance, and thus translate a poor miserable
sinner from the terrors of hell into paradise.

In the Seven Penitential Psalms, written 1517,
Luther says: "If God's mercy is to be praised, then all
[human] merits and worthiness must come to naught."
(Weimar 1, 161.) "Not such are blessed as have no sins
or extricate themselves by their own labors, but only
those whose sins are graciously forgiven by God." (167.)
"It is characteristic of God (es ist Gottes Natur) to make
something out of nothing. Hence God cannot make
anything out of him who is not as yet nothing ...
Therefore God receives none but the forsaken, heals
none but the ill, gives sight to none but the blind, quickens
none but the dead, makes pious none but the sinners,
makes wise none but the ignorant,-in short, He
has mercy on none but the miserable, and gives grace to
none but those who are in disgrace.Whoever therefore,
is a proud saint, wise or just, cannot become God's
material and receive God's work within himself, but
remains in his own work and makes an imaginary,
seeming, false, and painted saint of himself, i.e., a hypocrite."
(183.) "For he whom Thou [God] dost justify
will never become righteous by his works; hence it is
called Thy righteousness, since Thou givest it to us by
grace, and we do not obtain it by works." (192.) "Israel
the true [new] man, does not take refuge in himself, nor
in his strength, nor in his righteousness and wisdom ...
For help and grace is not with themselves. They are sinners
and damned in themselves, as He also says through
Hosea: O Israel, with thee there is nothing but damnation,
but with Me is thine help." (210.) "He, He, God
Himself, not they themselves,will deliver the true Israel
...Mark well, Israel has sin and cannot help itself."(211.)

In his explanation of Ps. 109 (110), 1518, Luther
says: "He calls these children [conceived from spiritual
seed, the Word of God] dew, since no soul is converted
and transformed from Adam's sinful childhood to the
gracious childhood of Christ by human work, but only
by God, who works from heaven like the dew, as Micah
writes: ．The children of Israel will be like the dew given
by God which does not wait for the hands of men.' "
(701.) Again: "In every single man God precedes with
grace and works before we pray for grace or cooperate.
The Doctors call this gratiam primam et praevenientem,
that is, the first and prevenient grace. Augustine: Gratia
Dei praevenit, ut velimus, ne frustra velimus.God's grace
prevenes that we will, lest we will in vain." (710.)

In his 40 theses for the Heidelberg disputation, also
of 1518, Luther says of man's powers in spiritual matters:
"13. Free will after sin [the Fall] is a mere titular
affair [an empty title only], and sins mortally when it
does what it is able to do. Liberum arbitrium post peccatum
res est de solo titulo et dum facit, quod in se est, peccat
mortaliter." "16. A man desirous of obtaining grace
by doing what he is able to do adds sin to sin, becoming
doubly guilty.Homo putans, se ad gratiam velle pervenire
faciendo, quod est in se, peccatum addit peccato, ut duplo
reus fiat." "18. It is certain that a man must utterly
despair of himself in order to become apt to acquire the
grace of Christ. Certum est, hominem de se penitus
oportere desperare, ut aptus fiat ad consequendam gratiam
Christi." (W. 1, 354.) By way of explanation Luther
added to thesis 13:"The first part [of this thesis, that free
will is a mere empty title] is apparent, because the will is
a captive and a servant to sin, not that it is nothing, but
that it is free only to [do] evil-non quod sit nihil, sed
quod non sit liberum nisi ad malum. John 8, 34. 36:
．Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. If the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.'Hence,
St. Augustine says in his book De Spiritu et Litera: Free
will without grace can only sin-non nisi ad peccandum
valet. And in his second book against Julianus: You call
that a free will which in truth is captive, etc."To thesis 16
Luther added: "When man does what he is able to do
(dum facit, quod est in se), he sins, seeking altogether his
own.And if he is minded to become worthy of, and apt
for, grace by a sin, he adds proud presumption."

In his sermon of 1519 on Genesis 4, Luther
remarked: "This passage [．The Lord had respect unto
Abel'] subverts the entire liberty of our human will. Hic
locus semel invertit universam libertatem voluntatis nostrae."
(Weimar 9, 337.) In a sermon of September 8,
1520, we read: "By nature we are born accursed; ...
through Christ we are born again children of life. Thus
we are born not by free will, not by works, not by our
efforts. As a child in the womb is not born by its own
works, but suffers itself to be carried and to be given
birth, so we are justified by suffering, not by doing."
(474.) "Where, then," Luther exclaimed about the same
time in his Operationes in Psalmos, "will free will
remain? where the doing what one can? Ubi ergo
manebit liberum arbitrium, ubi facere quod in se?" (5,
544. 74.) In a sermon of February 2, 1521, he said:
"Whatever grace is in us comes from God alone. Here
free will is entirely dead.All that we attempt to establish
with our powers is lost unless He prevenes and makes us
alive through His grace. Grace is His own work, which
we receive in our hearts by faith. This grace the soul did
not possess before, for it is the new man ... The great
proud saints will not do this [ascribe everything to God
and His mercy]. They, too,would have a share in it, saying
to our Lord: ．This I have done by my free will, this I
have deserved.'" (9, 573; 5, 544.)

Thus Luther, from the very beginning of the
Reformation, stood for the doctrine of justification,
conversion, and salvation by grace alone.Most emphatically
he denied that man though free to a certain extent
in human and temporal affairs, is able to cooperate with
the powers of his natural, unregenerate will in matters
spiritual and pertaining to God. This was also the position
which Luther victoriously defended against
Erasmus in his De Servo Arbitrio of 1525. Goaded on by
the Romanists to come out publicly against the German
heretic, the great Humanist, in his Diatribe of 1524, had
shrewdly planned to attack his opponent at the most
vulnerable point. As such he regarded Luther's monergistic
doctrine, according to which it is God alone who
justifies, converts, preserves, and saves men,without any
works of their own. In reality, however, as presently
appeared from his glorious classic on the sola-gratia
doctrine, Erasmus had assaulted the strongest gate of
Luther's fortress. For the source of the wonderful power
which Luther displayed throughout the Reformation
was none other than the divine conviction born of the
Word of God that in every respect grace alone is the
cause of our justification and salvation.And if ever this
blessed doctrine was firmly established, successfully
defended, and greatly glorified, it was in Luther's book
against Erasmus.

Justification, conversion, perseverance in faith, and
final salvation, obtained not by any effort of ours, but in
every respect received as a gracious gift of God alone-
that was the teaching also to which Luther faithfully,
most determinedly, and without any wavering adhered
throughout his life. In his Large Confession of 1528, for
example, we read: "Herewith I reject and condemn as
nothing but error all dogmas which extol our free will,
as they directly conflict with this help and grace of our
Savior Jesus Christ. For since outside of Christ death
and sin are our lords, and the devil our god and prince,
there can be no power or might, no wisdom or understanding,
whereby we can qualify ourselves for, or strive
after, righteousness and life; but we must be blinded
people and prisoners of sin and the devil's own, to do
and to think what pleases them and is contrary to God
and His commandments." (CONC. TRIGL. 897, 43.)

#### 153. Luther's Doctrine Endorsed.

To adhere faithfully to Luther's doctrine of conversion
and salvation by grace alone was also the determination
of the loyal Lutherans in their opposition to the
Synergists. Planck correctly remarks that the doctrine
which Flacius and the Anti-Synergists defended was the
very doctrine which "Luther advocated in his conflict
with Erasmus." (Prot. Lehrbegriff 4, 667.) This was substantially
conceded even by the opponents. When, for
example, at the colloquy in Worms, 1557, the Romanists
demanded that Flacius's doctrine of free will be condemned
by the Lutherans, Melanchthon declared that
herein one ought not to submit to the Papists, who slyly,
under the name of Illyricus [Flacius], demanded the
condemnation of Luther, whose Opinion in the doctrine
of free will he [Melanchthon] was neither able nor
willing to condemn. (Gieseler 3, 2, 232.) In their
Confession, published in March, 1569, the theologians of
Ducal Saxony (Wigand, Coelestin, Irenaeus, Kirchner,
etc.) declared: "We also add that we embrace the doctrine
and opinion of Dr. Luther, the Elias of these latter
days of the world, as it is most luminously and skilfully
set forth in the book De Servo Arbitrio, against Erasmus,
in the Commentary on Genesis, and in other books; and
we hold that this teaching of Luther agrees with the eternal
Word of God." (Schluesselburg, Catalogus 5, 133.)

Luther's sola-gratia-doctrine was embodied also in
the Formula of Concord, and this with a special endorsement
of his book De Servo Arbitrio. For here we read:
"Even so Dr. Luther wrote of this matter [the doctrine
that our free will has no power whatever to qualify itself
for righteousness, etc.] also in his book De Servo
Arbitrio; i.e., Of the Captive Will of Man, in opposition
to Erasmus, and elucidated and supported this position
well and thoroughly [egregie et solide]; and afterward he
repeated and explained it in his glorious exposition of
the book of Genesis, especially of chapter 26. There likewise
his meaning and understanding of some other
peculiar disputations introduced incidentally by
Erasmus, as of absolute necessity, etc.,have been secured
by him in the best and most careful way against all misunderstanding
and perversion; to which we also hereby
appeal and refer others." (897, 44; 981, 28.) In the passage
of his Commentary on Genesis referred to by the
Formula, Luther does not, as has been claimed, retract
or modify his former statements concerning the inability
of the human will and the monergism of grace, but
emphasizes that, in reading De Servo Arbitrio, one must
heed and not overlook his frequent admonitions to
concern oneself with God as He has revealed Himself in
the Gospel, and not speculate concerning God in His
transcendence, absoluteness, and majesty, as the One in
whom we live and move and have our being, and without
whom nothing can either exist or occur, and whose
wonderful ways are past finding out. (Conc.Trigl., 898.)
And the fact that the Lutheran theologians, living at the
time and immediately after the framing of the Formula
of Concord, objected neither to the book De Servo
Arbitrio itself nor to its public endorsement by the
Formula of Concord, is an additional proof of the fact
that they were in complete agreement with Luther's
teaching of conversion and salvation by grace alone.
(Frank 1, 120.)

This sola-gratia-doctrine, the vital truth of
Christianity, rediscovered and proclaimed once more by
Luther, was, as stated, the target at which Erasmus
directed his shafts. In his Diatribe he defined the power
of free will to be the faculty of applying oneself to grace
(facultas applicandi se ad gratiam), and declared that
those are the best theologians who, while ascribing as
much as possible to the grace of God, do not eliminate
this human factor. He wrote: Free will is "the ability of
the human will according to which man is able either to
turn himself to what leads to eternal salvation or to turn
away from it." (St. L. 18, 1612.) Again:"Those, therefore,
who are farthest apart from the views of Pelagius ascribe
to grace the most, but to free will almost nothing; yet
they do not abolish it entirely. They say that man cannot
will anything good without special grace, cannot
begin anything good, cannot continue in it, cannot
complete anything without the chief thing, the constant
help of divine grace. This opinion seems to be pretty
probable because it leaves to man a striving and an
effort, and yet does not admit that he is to ascribe even
the least to his own powers." (1619.) One must avoid
extremes, and seek the middle of the road, said
Erasmus.Pelagius had fallen into Scylla, and Luther into
Charybdis."I am pleased with the opinion of those who
ascribe to free will something, but to grace by far the
most." (1666.) Essentially, this was the error held,
nursed, and defended also by the Synergists, though frequently
in more guarded and ambiguous phrases. But
their theory of conversion also involved, as Schaff and
Schmauk put it,"the idea of a partnership between God
and man, and a corresponding division of work and
merit." (Conf. Principle, 600.)

However, these attempts to revamp the Semi-
Pelagian teaching resulted in a controversy which more
and longer than any other endangered and disquieted
the Lutheran Church, before as well as after the adoption
of the Formula of Concord.Whether the unregenerate
man, when the Word of God is preached, and the
grace of God is offered him, is able to prepare himself
for grace, accept it, and assent thereto, was, according to
the Formula of Concord, "the question upon which, for
quite a number of years now, there has been a controversy
among some theologians in the churches of the
Augsburg Confession." (881, 2.) And of all the controversies
after Luther's death the synergistic controversy
was most momentous and consequential. For the doctrine
of grace with which it dealt is the vital breath of
every Christian. Without it neither faith nor the
Christian religion can live and remain. "If we believe,"
says Luther in De Servo Arbitrio, "that Christ has
redeemed men by His blood, then we must confess that
the entire man was lost; otherwise we make Christ
superfluous or the Redeemer of but the meanest part of
us, which is blasphemous and sacrilegious."Reading the
book of Erasmus, in which he bent every effort toward
exploding the doctrine of grace, Luther felt the hand of
his opponent clutching his throat. In the closing paragraph
of De Servo Arbitrio Luther wrote: "I highly laud
and extol you for this thing also, that of all others you
alone have gone to the heart of the subject ...You alone
have discerned the core of the matter and have aimed at
the throat, for which I thank you heartily.-Unus tu et
solus cardinem rerum vidisti, et ipsum iugulum petisti,
pro quo ex animo tibi gratias ago, in hac enim causa libentius
versor, quantum favet tempus et otium." (E. v. a. 7,
367. 137; St. L. 18, 1967; Pieper, Dogm. 2, 543.) And so
the Synergists, who renewed the doctrine of Erasmus,
also flew at the throat of Christianity. Genuine
Lutheranism would have been strangled if synergism
had emerged victorious from this great controversy of
grace versus free will.

#### 154. The Father of Synergism.

During the first period of his activity in Wittenberg,
Melanchthon was in perfect agreement with Luther also
on the question of man's inability in spiritual matters
and the sole activity,or monergism, of grace in the work
of his salvation. As late as 1530 he incorporated these
views in the Augsburg Confession, as appears, in particular,
from Articles II,V,XVIII, and XIX.His later doctrine
concerning the three concurring causes of conversion
(the Holy Spirit, the Word, and the consenting will of
man), as well as his theory explaining synergistically,
from an alleged dissimilar action in man, the difference
why some are saved while others are lost, is not so much
as hinted at in the Confession.But even at this early date
(1530) or soon after, Melanchthon also does not seem
any longer to have agreed whole-heartedly with Luther
in the doctrine of grace and free will.And in the course
of time his theology drifted farther and farther from its
original monergistic moorings. Nor was Luther wholly
unaware of the secret trend of his colleague and friend
toward-Erasmus. In 1536, when the deviations of
Melanchthon and Cruciger, dealt with in our previous
chapter, were brought to his notice, Luther exclaimed:
"Haec est ipsissima theologia Erasmi This is the identical
theology of Erasmus, nor can there be anything more
opposed to our doctrine." (Kolde, Analecta, 266.)

That Melanchthon's theology was verging toward
Erasmus appears from his letter of June 22, 1537, to Veit
Dietrich, in which he said that he desired a more thorough
exposition also of the doctrines of predestination
and of the consent of the will. (C. R. 3, 383.) Before this,
in his Commentary on Romans of 1532, he had written
that there is some cause of election also in man, viz., in
as far as he does not repudiate the grace offered-
"tamen eatenus aliquam causam in accipiente esse
quatenus promissionem oblatam non repudiat." (Seeberg
4, 442.) In an addition to his Loci of 1533 he also spoke
of a cause of justification and election residing in man.
(C. R. 21 332.) In the revised editions of 1535 and 1543
he plainly began to prepare the way for his later bold
and unmistakable deviations. For even though unable
to point out a clean-cut and unequivocal synergistic
statement, one cannot read these editions without
scenting a Semi-Pelagian and Erasmian atmosphere.
What Melanchthon began to teach was the doctrine
that man, when approached by the Word of God, is able
to assume either an attitude of pro or con, i.e., for or
against the grace of God. The same applies to the
Variata of 1540 in which the frequent "adiuvari" there
employed, though not incorrect as such, was not without
a synergistic flavor.

Tschackert remarks of the Loci of 1535:
"Melanchthon wants to make man responsible for his
state of grace.Nor does the human will in consequence
of original sin lose the ability to decide itself when incited;
the will produces nothing new by its own power, but
assumes an attitude toward what approaches it.When
man hears the Word of God, and the Holy Spirit produces
spiritual affections in his heart, the will can either
assent or turn against it. In this way Melanchthon
arrives at the formula, ever after stereotype with him,
that there are three concurring causes in the process of
conversion: ．the Word of God, the Holy Spirit, and the
human will,which, indeed, is not idle, but strives against
its infirmity.' "(520.)

However, during the life of Luther, Melanchthon
made no further measurable progress towards synergism.
Perhaps the unpleasant experiences following
upon his innovations in the doctrine of good works
acted as a check also on the public development of his
synergistic tendencies. During Luther's life
Melanchthon, as he himself admitted to Carlowitz
(106), dissimulated, keeping his deviating views to himself
and his intimate friends.After Luther's death, however,
he came out unmistakably and publicly, also in
favor of synergism, endorsing even the Erasmian definition
of free will as "the power in man to apply himself
to grace." He plainly taught that, when drawn by the
Holy Spirit, the will is able to decide pro or con, to obey
or to resist. Especially in his lectures, Melanchthon-
not indeed directly, but mentioning the name of
Flacius-continually lashed such phrases of Luther as
"purely passive," "block," "resistance,"-a fact to which
Schluesselburg, who had studied in Wittenberg, refers
in support of his assertion that Melanchthon had
departed from Luther's teaching on free will. (Catalogus
6, 32.) While Melanchthon formerly (in his Loci of
1543) had spoken of three causes of a good action
(bonae actionis) he now publicly advocated the doctrine
of three concurring causes of conversion.Now he boldly
maintained that, since the grace of God is universal,
one must assume, and also teach, that there are different
actions in different men, which accounts for the fact
that some are converted and saved while others are lost.
According to the later Melanchthon, therefore, man's
eternal salvation evidently does not depend on the gracious
operations of God's Holy Spirit and Word alone,
but also on his own correct conduct toward grace. In his
heart, especially when approaching the mercy-seat in
prayer, Melanchthon, no doubt, forgot and disavowed
his own teaching, and believed and practised Luther's
sola-gratia doctrine. But it cannot be denied that, in his
endeavors to harmonize universal grace with the fact
that not all, but some only, are saved, Melanchthon
repudiated the monergism of Luther, espoused and
defended the powers of free will in spiritual matters,and
thought, argued, spoke, and wrote in terms of synergism.
Indeed, Melanchthon must be regarded as the
father of both synergism and the rationalistic methods
employed in its defense, and as the true father also of the
modern rationalistico-synergistic theology represented
by such distinguished men as Von Hofmann,
Thomasius, Kahnis, Luthardt, etc. (Pieper 2, 582; Frank
l, 231.)

#### 155.Unsound Statements of Melanchthon.

Following are some of the ambiguous and false
deliverances ofMelanchthon: In the Loci of 1535 the socalled
human cause of conversion which must be added
to the Word and Spirit is described as endeavoring,
striving, and wishing to obey and believe.We read: "We
do not say this to ensnare the consciences, or to deter
men from the endeavor to obey and believe, or from
making an effort. On the contrary, since we are to begin
with the Word,we certainly must not resist the Word of
God, but strive to obey it ...We see that these causes are
united: the Word, the Holy Spirit, and the will, which is
certainly not idle, but strives against its infirmity. In this
manner ecclesiastical writers are accustomed to join
these causes. Basil says:．Only will,and God will precede,'
God precedes, calls, moves, assists us, but let us beware
lest we resist ... Chrysostom says: He who draws, draws
him who is willing." (C. R. 21, 376.)

In conversion and salvation God certainly must do
and does His share, but man must beware lest he fail to
do what is required of him. This is also the impression
received from Melanchthon's statements in the third
elaboration of his Loci, 1543.We read:"Here three causes
of a good action concur (hic concurrunt tres causae
bonae actionis): the Word of God, the Holy Spirit, and
the human will assenting to and not resisting the Word
of God (humana voluntas assentiens, nec repugnans
Verbo Dei). For it could expel [the Spirit], as Saul
expelled [Him] of his own free will. But when the mind
hearing and sustaining itself does not resist, does not
give way to diffidence, but, the Holy Spirit assisting,
endeavors to assent,-in such a struggle the will is not
inactive (in hoc certamine voluntas non est otiosa). The
ancients have said that good works are done when grace
precedes and the will follows. So also Basil says: ．Movnon
qevlhson, kai; qeo;" proapanta'/. Only will, and God
anticipates. God precedes, calls,moves, assists us; but as
for us, let us see to it that we do not resist.Deus antevertit
nos, vocat, movet, adiuvat, sed nos viderimus, ne
repugnemus,' (21, 658.) And Phil. 1, 6: ．He which hath
begun a good work in you will perform it until the day
of Jesus Christ,' i.e., we are assisted by God (adiuvamur
a Deo), but we must hear the Word of God and not
resist the drawing God." (916.) "God draws our minds
that they will, but we must assent, not resist.Deus trahit
mentes, ut velint, sed assentiri nos, non repugnare
oportet." (917.) Here we also meet the remark: "But the
will, when assisted by the Holy Spirit, becomes more
free. Fit autem voluntas adiuvata Spiritu Sancto magis
libera." (663.) Frank comments pertinently that the
magis presupposes a certain degree of liberty of the will
before the assistance of the Holy Spirit. (1, 198.)

The boldest synergistic statements are found in the
Loci of 1548. It was the year of the Leipzig Interim, in
which the same error was embodied as follows: "The
merciful God does not deal with man as with a block,
but draws him in such a way that his will, too, cooperates."
(C. R. 7, 51. 260.) As to the Loci of this year,
Bindseil remarks in the Corpus Reformatorum: "This
edition is famous on account of certain paragraphs
inserted by the author in the article on Free Will. For
these additions contain the Erasmian definition of free
will (that it is the faculty of applying oneself to grace),
on account of which Melanchthon was charged with
synergism by the Flacians ... For this reason the edition
is called by J. T.Mayer ．the worst of all (omnium pessima).'
" At the Weimar colloquy, 1560, even Strigel was
not willing to identify himself openly with the Erasmian
definition of free will (facultas applicandi se ad gratiam)
as found in one of these sections.When Flacius quoted
the passage, Strigel retorted excitedly: "I do not defend
that definition which you have quoted from the recent
edition [{{< hiddenanchor 1548 >}}1548{{< /hiddenanchor >}}.When did you hear it from me? When
have I undertaken to defend it?" (Frank l, 199. 135.) At
the Herzberg colloquy Andreae remarked: "The Loci
Communes of Melanchthon are useful. But whoever
reads the locus de libero arbitriomust confess, even if he
judges most mildly, that the statements are dubious and
ambiguous. And what of the four paragraphs which
were inserted after Luther's death? For here we read:
．There must of necessity be a cause of difference in us
why a Saul is rejected, a David received.' " (Pieper 2,
587.) From these additions of 1548 we cite: "Nor does
conversion occur in David in such a manner as when a
stone is turned into a fig: but free will does something in
David; for when he hears the rebuke and the promise,
he willingly and freely confesses his fault. And his will
does something when he sustains himself with this
word: The Lord hath taken away your sin.And when he
endeavors to sustain himself with this word, he is
already assisted by the Holy Spirit." (C. R. 21, 659.)
Again: "I therefore answer those who excuse their idleness
because they think that free will does nothing, as
follows: It certainly is the eternal and immovable will of
God that you obey the voice of the Gospel, that you hear
the Son of God, that you acknowledge the Mediator.
How black is that sin which refuses to behold the
Mediator, the Son of God, presented to the human race!
You will answer: ．I cannot.' But in a manner you can
(immo aliquo modo potes), and when you sustain yourself
with the voice of the Gospel, then pray that God
would assist you, and know that the Holy Spirit is effi-
cacious in such consolation.Know that just in this manner
God intends to convert us, when we, roused by the
promise wrestle with ourselves, pray and resist our diffidence
and other vicious affections. For this reason
some of the ancient Fathers have said that free will in
man is the faculty to apply himself to grace (liberum
arbitrium in homine facultatem esse applicandi se ad gratiam);
i.e., he hears the promise, endeavors to assent,
and abandons sins against conscience. Such things do
not occur in devils. The difference therefore between the
devils and the human race ought to be considered.
These matters however, become still clearer when the
promise is considered. For since the promise is universal,
and since there are no contradictory wills in God,
there must of necessity be in us some cause of difference
why Saul is rejected and David is received; i.e., there
must of necessity be some dissimilar action in these two.
Cum promissio sit universalis, nec sint in Deo contradictoriae
voluntates, necesse est in nobis esse aliquam discriminis
causam, cur Saul abiiciatur.David recipiatur, id est,
necesse est aliquam esse actionem dissimilem in his
duobus. Properly understood, this is true, and the use
[usus] in the exercises of faith and in true consolation
(when our minds acquiesce in the Son of God, shown
in the promise) will illustrate this copulation of causes:
the Word of God, the Holy Spirit, and the will." (C. R.
21, 659f.) At the colloquy of Worms, 1557,
Melanchthon, interpellated by Brenz, is reported to
have said that the passage in his Loci of 1548 defining f
dictum est: he faculty of applying oneself to grace
referred to the regenerated will (voluntas renata), as, he
said, appeared from the context. (Gieseler 3, 2, 225;
Frank 1, 198.) As a matter of fact, however, the context
clearly excludes this interpretation. In the passage quoted,
Melanchthon, moreover, plainly teaches: 1. that in
conversion man, too can do, and really does, something
by willingly confessing his fault, by sustaining himself
with the Word, by praying that God would assist him,
by wrestling with himself, by striving against diffidence,
etc.; 2. that the nature of fallen man differs from that of
the devils in this, that his free will is still able to apply
itself to grace, endeavor to assent to it, etc.; 3. that the
dissimilar actions resulting from the different use of this
natural ability accounts for the fact that some are saved
while others are lost. Such was the plain teaching of
Melanchthon from which he never receded, but which
he, apart from other publications, reaffirmed in every
new edition of his Loci. For all, including the last one to
appear during his life (1559), contain the additions of
1548."The passage added by the author [Melanchthon,
{{< hiddenanchor 1548 >}}1548{{< /hiddenanchor >}} after Luther's death is repeated in all subsequent
editions," says Bindseil. (C. R. 21, 570.)

The sections which were added to the Loci after
1548 also breathe the same synergistic spirit. In 1553
Melanchthon inserted a paragraph which says that,
when approached by the Holy Spirit, the will can obey
or resist.We read: "The liberty of the human will after
the Fall, also in the non-regenerate, is the faculty by
virtue of which man is able to govern his motions, i.e.,
he can enjoin upon his external members such actions
as agree, or such as do not agree, with the Law of God.
But he cannot banish doubts from his mind and evil
inclinations from his heart without the light of the
Gospel and without the Holy Spirit. But when the will
is drawn by the holy Spirit, it can obey or resist. Cum
autem trahitur a Spiritu Sancto, potest obsequi et
repugnare." (21, 1078; 13, 162.)

Other publications contain the same doctrine.
While in his Loci of 1543 he had spoken only of three
causes of a good action (bonae actionis),Melanchthon,
in his Enarratio Symboli Nicaeni of 1550, substituted
"conversion" for "good action."We read: In conversion
these causes concur: the Holy Spirit, the voice of the
Gospel, "and the will of man, which does not resist the
divine voice, but somehow, with trepidation, assents.
Concurrunt in conversione hae causae: Spiritus Sanctus ...
vox Evangelii ... et voluntas hominis, quae non repugnat
voci divinae, sed inter trepidationem utcumque assentitur."
Again: "And concerning this copulation of causes it
is said: The Spirit comes to the assistance of our infirmity.
And Chrysostom truly says: God draws, but he
draws him who is willing."Again:God's promise is universal,
and there are no contradictory wills in God;
hence, though Paul is drawn in a different manner than
Zacchaeus,"nevertheless there is some assent of the will
(tamen aliqua est voluntatis assensio)." "God therefore
begins and draws by the voice of the Gospel but He
draws him who is willing, and assists him who assents."
"Nor is anything detracted from the glory of God, but it
is truly affirmed that the assistance of God always concurs
in the beginning and afterwards (auxilium Dei
semper initio et deinceps concurrere)." (23, 280ff.)

Accordingly, God merely concurs as one of three causes,
among which the will of man is the third. In his
Examen Ordinandorum of 1554, Melanchthon again
replaced the term "good action" by "conversion." He
says: "In conversion these causes concur: the Word of
God, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father and Son send to
kindle our hearts, and our will, assenting and not resisting
the Word of God (et nostra voluntas assentiens et non
repugnans Verbo Dei) . And lest we yield to diffidence,
we must consider that both preachings are universal, the
preaching of repentance as well as the promise of grace
... Let us therefore not resist but assent to the promise,
and constantly repeat this prayer: I believe,O Lord, but
come to the help ofmy weakness."(23, 15.) Finally in his
Opinion on the Weimar Book of Confutation, March 9,
1559,Melanchthon remarks:"Again, if the will is able to
turn from the consolation, it must be inferred that it
works something and follows the Holy Spirit when it
accepts the consolation. Item, so sich der Wille vom Trost
abwenden mag, so ist dagegen zu verstehen, dass er etwas
wirket und folget dem Heiligen Geist, so er den Trost
annimmt." (9, 768.)

W. Preger is right when he says: "According to
Melanchthon's view, natural man is able to do the following
[when the Word of God is preached to him]: he
is able not to resist; he is able to take pains with respect
to obedience; he is able to comfort himself with the
Word ... This [according to Melanchthon] is a germ of
the positive good will still found in natural man which
prevenient grace arouses." (Flacius Illyricus 2, 189f.)
Schmauk writes:Melanchthon found "the cause for the
actual variation in the working of God's grace in man,
its object. This subtle synergistic spirit attacks the very
foundation of Lutheranism, flows out into almost every
doctrine, and weakens the Church at every point.And it
was particularly this weakness which the great multitude
of Melanchthon's scholars, who became the leaders
of the generation of which we are speaking,
absorbed, and which rendered it difficult to return,
finally, after years of struggle, to the solid ground, once
more recovered in the Formula of Concord." (Conf.
Principle, 601.)

R. Seeberg characterizes Melanchthon's doctrine as
follows: "A synergistic trait therefore appears in his doctrine.
In the last analysis, God merely grants the outer
and inner possibility of obtaining salvation. Without
man's cooperation this possibility would not become
reality; and he is able to refuse this cooperation. It is,
therefore, in conversion equally a cause with the others.
Sie [die Mitwirkung des Menschen] ist also freilich eine
den andern Ursachen gleichberechtigte Ursache in der
Bekehrung." God makes conversion possible, but only
the decision of man's free will makes it actual,-such,
according to Seeberg, was the "synergism" of
Melanchthon. (Seeberg, Dogg., 4, 444. 446.)

Frank says of Melanchthon's way of solving the
question why some are converted and saved while others
are lost: "The road chosen by Melanchthon has
indeed led to the goal. The contradictions are solved.
But let us look where we have landed. We are standing-
in the Roman camp!" After quoting a passage
from the Tridentinum, which speaks of conversion in
terms similar to those employed by Melanchthon,
Frank continues: "The foundation stone of Luther's
original Reformation doctrine of salvation by grace
alone; viz., that nothing in us, not even our will moved
and assisted by God, is the causa meritoria of salvation,
is subverted by these propositions; and it is immaterial
to the contrite heart whether much or little is demanded
from free will as the faculty of applying oneself to
grace."Frank adds:"What the Philippists, synchronously
[with Melanchthon] and later,propounded regarding
this matter [of free will] are but variations of the theme
struck by Melanchthon. Everywhere the sequence of
thought is the same, with but this difference, that here
the faults of the Melanchthonian theory together with
its consequences come out more clearly." (1, 134f.) The
same is true of modern synergistic theories. Without
exception they are but variations of notes struck by
Melanchthon,-the father of all the synergists that have
raised their heads within the Lutheran Church.

#### 156. Pfeffinger Champions Synergistic Doctrine.

Prior to 1556 references to the unsound position of
the Wittenberg and Leipzig theologians are met with
but occasionally. (Planck 4, 568.) The unmistakably
synergistic doctrine embodied in the Loci of 1548, as
well as in the Leipzig Interim, did not cause alarm and
attract attention immediately. But when, in 1555, John
Pfeffinger [born 1493; 1539 superintendent, and 1543
professor in Leipzig; assisted 1548 in framing the
Leipzig Interim; died January 1, {{< hiddenanchor 1573 >}}1573{{< /hiddenanchor >}} published his
"Five Questions Concerning the Liberty of the Human
Will-De Libertate Voluntatis Humanae Quaestiones
Quinque. D. Johannes Pfeffinger Lipsiae Editae in
Officina Georgii Hantschi 1555," the controversy flared
up instantly. It was a little booklet containing besides a
brief introduction, only 41 paragraphs, or theses. In
these Pfeffinger discussed and defended the synergistic
doctrine of Melanchthon, maintaining that in conversion
man, too, must contribute his share though it be
ever so little.

Early in the next year Pfeffinger was already
opposed by the theologians of Thuringia, the stanch
opponents of the Philippists, John Stolz, court-preacher
at Weimar composing 110 theses for this purpose. In
1558 Amsdorf published his Public Confession of the
True Doctrine of the Gospel and Confutation of the
Fanatics of the Present Time, in which he, quoting from
memory, charged Pfeffinger with teaching that man is
able to prepare himself for grace by the natural powers
of his free will, just as the godless sophists, Thomas
Aquinas, Scotus, and their disciples, had held. (Planck 4,
573. 568.) About the same time Stolz published the 110
theses just referred to with a preface by Aurifaber
(Refutatio Propositionum Pfeffingeri de Libero Arbitrio) .
Flacius, then professor in Jena, added his Refutation of
Pfeffinger's Propositions on Free Will and Jena
Disputation on Free Will. In the same year, 1558,
Pfeffinger, in turn published his Answer to the Public
Confession of Amsdorf, charging the latter with falsification,
and denouncing Flacius as the "originator and
father of all the lies which have troubled the Lutheran
Church during the last ten years." But at the same time
Pfeffinger showed unmistakably that the charges of his
opponents were but too well founded. Says Planck:
"Whatever may have moved Pfeffinger to do so, he
could not (even if Flacius himself had said it for him)
have confessed synergism more clearly and more definitely
than he did spontaneously and unasked in this
treatise." (4, 574.) Frank: "Pfeffinger goes beyond
Melanchthon and Strigel; for the action here demanded
of, and ascribed to, the natural will is, according to him,
not even in need of liberation by prevenient grace ...His
doctrine may without more ado be designated as Semi-
Pelagianism." (1, 137.)

At Wittenberg, Pfeffinger was supported by George
Major, Paul Eber, and Paul Crell and before long his
cause was espoused also by Victorin Strigel in Jena.
Disputations by the Wittenberg and Leipzig synergists
(whom Schluesselburg, 5, 16, calls "cooperators" and
"die freiwilligen Herren") and by their opponents in
Jena increased the animosity. Both parties cast moderation
to the winds. In a public letter of 1558 the
Wittenberg professors, for example, maligned Flacius in
every possible way, and branded him as "der verloffene
undeutsche Flacius Illyricus" and as the sole author of
all the dissensions in the churches of Germany. (Planck
4, 583.)

#### 157. Statements of Pfeffinger.

Following are some of the synergistic deliverances
made by Pfeffinger in his Five Questions Concerning the
Liberty of the Human Will. paragraph 11 reads:"Thirdly,when we
inquire concerning the spiritual actions, it is correct to
answer that the human will has not such a liberty as to
be able to effect the spiritual motions without the help
of the Holy Spirit (humanam voluntatem non habere
eiusmodi libertatem, ut motus spirituales sine auxilio
Spiritus Sancti efficere possit)" paragraph 14: "Therefore some
assent or apprehension on our part must concur
(oportet igitur nostram aliquam assensionem seu apprehensionem
concurrere) when the Holy Spirit has aroused
(accenderit) the mind, the will and the heart. Hence
Basil says; Only will, and God anticipates; and
Chrysostom: He who draws, draws him who is willing;
and Augustine: He assists those who have received the
gift of the call with becoming piety, and preserve the
gifts of God as far as man is able. Again: When grace
precedes, the will follows-praeeunte gratia, comitante
voluntate." In paragraph 16 we read: "The will, therefore, is not
idle, but assents faintly. Voluntas igitur non est otiosa sed
languide assentitur."

Paragraph 17 runs: "If the will were idle or purely
passive, there would be no difference between the pious
and the wicked, or between the elect and the damned,
as, between Saul and David, between Judas and Peter.
God would also become a respecter of persons and the
author of contumacy in the wicked and damned; and to
God would be ascribed contradictory wills,-which
conflicts with the entire Scripture.Hence it follows that
there is in us a cause why some assent while others do
not. Sequitur ergo in nobis esse aliquam causam, cur alii
assentiantur, alii non assentiantur." paragraph 24:"Him [the Holy
Spirit], therefore, we must not resist; but on the part of
our will, which is certainly not like a stone or block,
some assent must be added-sed aliquam etiam assensionem
accedere nostrae voluntatis, quam non sicut
saxum aut incudem se habere certum est." paragraph 30: "But
apprehension on our part must concur. For, since the
promise of grace is universal, and since we must obey
this promise, some difference between the elect and the
rejected must be inferred from our will (sequitur,
aliquod discrimen inter electos et reiectos a voluntate nostra
sumendum esse), viz., that those who resist the promise
are rejected, while those who embrace the promise
are received ... All this clearly shows that our will is not
idle in conversion or like a stone or block in its conduct.
Ex quibus omnibus manifestissimum apparet, voluntatem
nostram non esse otiosam in conversione, aut se ut
saxum aut incudem habere."

Paragraph 34 reads: "Some persons, however, shout that the
assistance of the Holy Spirit is extenuated and diminished
if even the least particle be attributed to the
human will. Though this argument may appear specious
and plausible, yet pious minds understand that by
our doctrine-according to which we ascribe some
cooperation to our will; viz., some assent and apprehension
(qua tribuimus aliquam synergiam voluntati
nostrae, videlicet qualemcumque assensionem et apprehensionem)-
absolutely nothing is taken away from the
assistance rendered by the Holy Spirit. For we affirm
that the first acts (primas partes) must be assigned and
attributed to Him who first and primarily, through the
Word or the voice of the Gospel, moves our hearts to
believe, to which thereupon we, too, ought to assent as
much as we are able (cui deinde et nos, quantum in nobis
est, assentiri oportet), and not resist the Holy Spirit, but
submit to the Word, ponder, learn, and hear it, as Christ
says: ．Whosoever hath heard of the Father and learned,
cometh to Me.' " paragraph 36: "And although original sin has
brought upon our nature a ruin so sad and horrible that
we can hardly imagine it, yet we must not think that
absolutely all the knowledge (notitiae) which was found
in the minds of our first parents before the Fall has on
that account been destroyed and extinguished after the
Fall, or that the human will does not in any way differ
from a stone or a block; for we are, as St. Paul has said
most seriously, coworkers with God, which coworking,
indeed, is assisted and strengthened by the Holy
Spirit-sumus synergi Dei, quae quidem synergia adiuvatur
a Spiritu Sancto et confirmatur." Evidently no
comment is necessary to show that the passages cited
from Pfeffinger are conceived, born, and bred in Semi-
Pelagianism and rationalism.

Planck furthermore quotes from Pfeffinger's
Answer to Amsdorf, 1558: "And there is no other reason
why some are saved and some are damned than this one
alone, that some, when incited by the Holy Spirit, do not
resist, but obey Him and accept the grace and salvation
offered, while others will not accept it, but resist the
Holy Spirit, and despise the grace." (4, 578.) Again:
"Although the will cannot awaken or incite itself to spiritually
good works, but must be awakened and incited
thereto by the Holy Ghost, yet man is not altogether
excluded from such works of the Holy Ghost, as if he
were not engaged in it and were not to contribute his
share to it-dass er nicht auch dabei sein und das Seine
nicht auch dabei tun muesse." (576.) Again: In the hands
of the Holy Spirit man is not like a block or stone in the
hands of a sculptor, which do not and cannot "know,
understand, or feel what is done with them, nor in the
least further or hinder what the artist endeavors to make
of them." (576.) "But when the heart of man is touched,
awakened, and moved by the Holy Ghost, man must
not be like a dead stone or block, ... but must obey and
follow Him. And although he perceives his great weakness,
and, on the other hand, how powerfully sin in his
flesh opposes, he must nevertheless not desist, but ask
and pray God for grace and assistance against sin and
flesh." (577.) Planck remarks: According to Pfeffinger,
the powers for all this are still found in natural man,and
the only thing required is, not to recreate them, but
merely to incite them to action. (579.)

In 1558, in an appendix to his disputation of 1555,
Pfeffinger explained and illustrated his position, in substance,
as follows: I was to prove nothing else than that
some use of the will [in spiritual matters] was left, and
that our nature is not annihilated or extinguished, but
corrupted and marvelously depraved after the Fall.
Now, to be sure, free will cannot by its own natural powers
regain its integrity nor rise after being ruined, yet as
the doctrine [the Gospel] can be understood by paying
attention to it, so it can also in a manner (aliquo modo)
be obeyed by assenting to it. But it is necessary for all
who would dwell in the splendor of the eternal light and
in the sight of God to look up to and not turn away
from, the light. Schluesselburg adds: "Haec certe est synergia-
This is certainly synergism." (Catalogus 5, 161.)

Tschackert summarizes Pfeffinger's doctrine as follows:
"When the Holy Spirit, through the Word of God,
influences a man, then the assenting will becomes operative
as a factor of conversion. The reason why some
assent while others do not must be in themselves ...
Evidently Pfeffinger's opinion was that not only the
regenerate, but even the natural will of man possesses
the ability either to obey the divine Spirit or to resist
Him." (521.) According to W. Preger, Pfeffinger taught
"that the Holy Spirit must awaken and incite our nature
that it may understand, think, will and do what is right
and pleasing to God,"but that natural free will is able "to
obey and follow"the motions of the Spirit. (2, 192. 195.)

No doubt, Pfeffinger advocated, and was a candid
exponent and champion of, nothing but the three-concurring-
causes doctrine of Melanchthon, according to
which God never fails to do His share in conversion,
while we must beware (sed nos viderimus, C. R. 21, 658)
lest we fail to do our share. Pfeffinger himself made it a
special point to cite Melanchthon as his authority in this
matter. The last (41st) paragraph in his Five Questions
begins as follows:"We have briefly set forth the doctrine
concerning the liberty of the human will, agreeing with
the testimonies of the prophetic and apostolic
Scriptures, a fuller explanation of which students may
find in the writings of our preceptor, Mr. Philip (prolisciorem
explicationem requirant studiosi in scriptis D.
Philippi, praeceptoris nostri)." And when, in the subsequent
controversy Pfeffinger was publicly assailed by
Amsdorf, Flacius, and others, everybody knew that their
real target was none other than-Master Philip.
Melanchthon, too, was well aware of this fact. In his
Opinion on the Weimar Confutation, of March 9, 1559,
in which the synergism of the Philippists is extensively
treated, he said: "As to free will, it is apparent that they
attack me, Philip, in particular." (C. R. 9. 763.)

#### 158. Strigel and Huegel Entering Controversy.

The synergistic controversy received new zest and a
new impetus when, in 1559,Victorin Strigel and Huegel
(Hugelius), respectively professor and pastor at Jena, the
stronghold of the opponents of the Wittenberg
Philippists, opposed Flacius, espoused the cause of
Pfeffinger, championed the doctrine of Melanchthon,
and refused to endorse the so called Book of Confutation
which Flacius had caused to be drafted particularly
against the Wittenberg Philippists and Synergists, and to
be introduced. The situation thus created was all the
more sensational because, in the preceding controversies,
Strigel had, at least apparently, always sided with the
opponents of the Philippists.

The "Konfutationsbuch-Book of Confutation and
Condemnations of the Chief Corruptions, Sects, and
Errors Breaking in and Spreading at this Time" was
published in 1559 by Duke John Frederick II as a doctrinal
norm of his duchy. In nine chapters this Book, a
sort of forerunner of the Formula of Concord, dealt with
the errors 1. of Servetus, 2. of Schwenckfeld, 3. of the
Antinomians, 4. of the Anabaptists, 5. of the Zwinglians,
6. of the Synergists, 7. of Osiander and Stancarus, 8. of
the Majorists, 9. of the Adiaphorists. Its chief object, as
expressly stated in the Preface, was to warn against the
errors introduced by the Philippists, whose doctrines, as
also Planck admits,were not in any way misrepresented
in this document. (4, 597. 595.) The sixth part, directed
against synergism bore the title: "Confutatio
Corruptelarum in Articulo de Libero Arbitrio sive de
Viribus Humanis-Confutation of the Corruptions in
the Article Concerning Free Will or Concerning the
Human Powers." The Confutation was framed by the
Jena theologians, Strigel and Huegel also participating
in its composition. However, some of the references to
the corruptions of the Philippists must have been rather
vague and ambiguous in the first draft of the book ; for
when it was revised at the convention in Weimar,
Flacius secured the adoption of additions and changes
dealing particularly with the synergism of the
Wittenbergers, which were energetically opposed by
Strigel.

Even before the adoption of the Book of
Confutation, Strigel had been polemicizing against
Flacius. But now (as Flacius reports) he began to
denounce him at every occasion as the "architect of a
new theology" and an "enemy of the Augsburg
Confession." At the same time he also endeavored to
incite the students in Jena against him. Flacius, in turn,
charged Strigel with scheming to establish a Philippistic
party in Ducal Saxony. The public breach came when
the Book of Confutation was submitted for adoption and
publication in the churches and schools. Pastor Huegel
refused to read and explain it from the pulpit, and
Strigel presented his objections to the Duke, and asked
that his conscience be spared. But when Strigel failed to
maintain silence in the matter, he as well as Pastor
Huegel were summarily dealt with by the Duke. On
March 27, 1559, at two o'clock in the morning, both
were suddenly arrested and imprisoned. Flacius who
was generally regarded as the secret instigator of this act
of violence, declared publicly that the arrest had been
made without his counsel and knowledge. About six
months later (September 5, 1569) Strigel and Huegel
after making some doctrinal concessions and promising
not to enter into any disputation on the Confutation,
were set at liberty. (Planck 4, 591. 604.)

#### 159.Weimar Disputation.

In order to settle the differences, Flacius and his colleagues
(Wigand, Judex, Simon Musaeus), as well as
Strigel, asked for a public disputation, which John
Frederick, too was all the more willing to arrange
because dissatisfaction with his drastic procedure
against Strigel and Huegel was openly displayed everywhere
outside of Ducal Saxony. The disputation was
held at Weimar, August 2 to 8, 1560. It was attended by
the Saxon Dukes and their entire courts, as well as by a
large number of other spectators, not only from Jena,
but also from Erfurt,Wittenberg and Leipzig. The subjects
of discussion, for which both parties had submitted
theses were: Free Will, Gospel, Majorism,
Adiaphorism, and Indifferentism (academica epoche,
toleration of error) . The disputing parties (Flacius and
Strigel) agreed that "the only rule should be the Word of
God, and that a clear, plain text of the Holy Scriptures
was to weigh more than all the inferences and authorities
of interpreters" (Planck 4, 606.)

According to the proceedings of the Weimar
Disputation, written by Wigand and published by
Simon Musaeus 1562 and 1563 under the title:
"Disputatio de Originali Peccato et Libero Arbitrio inter
M. Flacium Illyr. et Vict. Strigelium Publice Vinariae
Anno 1560 Habita," the only questions discussed were
free will and, incidentally, original sin. Strigel defended
the Melanchthonian doctrine, according to which the
causes of conversion are the Holy Spirit, the Word of
God, and the will of man feebly assenting to the Gospel
and, at the same time, seeking strength from God. He
repeated the formula: "Concurrunt in conversione haec
tria: Spiritus Sanctus movens corda, vox Dei, voluntas
hominis, quae voci divinae assentitur." Flacius, on the
other hand, defended the mere passive of Luther, according
to which man, before he is converted and endowed
with faith, does not in any way cooperate with the Holy
Spirit but merely suffers and experiences His operations.
At the same time, however, he seriously damaged
and discredited himself as well as the sacred cause of
divine truth by maintaining that original sin is not a
mere accident, such as Strigel maintained, but the very
substance of man. The discussions were discontinued
after the thirteenth session. The Duke announced that
the disputation would be reopened later, charging both
parties in the mean time to maintain silence in public,-
a compromise to which Flacius and his adherents
were loath to consent.

John Wigand and Matthias Judex however continued
to enforce the Book of Confutation demanding an
unqualified adoption in every point, per omnia. When
the jurist Matthew Wesenbecius declined to accept the
book in this categorical way, he was not permitted to
serve as sponsor at a baptism. John Frederick was dissatisfied
with this procedure and action of the ministers;
and when they persisted in their demands, the autocratic
Duke deprived them of the right to excommunicate,
vesting this power in a consistory established at
Weimar. Flacius and his adherents protested against this
measure as tyranny exercised over the Church and a
suppression of the pure doctrine. As a result Musaeus,
Judex, Wigand, and Flacius were suspended and
expelled from Jena, December, 1561. (Gieseler 3, 2, 244.
247.) Their vacant chairs at the university were filled by
Freihub, Salmuth, and Selneccer, who had been recommended
by the Wittenberg Philippists at the request of
the Duke, who now evidently favored a compromise
with the Synergists. Strigel, too, was reinstated at Jena
after signing an ambiguous declaration.

Amsdorf, Gallus,Hesshusius, Flacius, and the other
exiled theologians denounced Strigel's declaration as
insincere and in conflict with Luther's book De Servo
Arbitrio, and demanded a public retraction of his synergistic
statements.When the ministers of Ducal Saxony
also declined to acknowledge Strigel's orthodoxy, a
more definite "Superdeclaration," framed by Moerlin
and Stoessel (but not signed by Strigel), was added as an
interpretation of Strigel's declaration. But even now a
minority refused to submit to the demands of the Duke,
because they felt that they were being deceived by
ambiguous terms, such as "capacity" and "aptitude,"
which the wily Strigel and the Synergists used in the
active or positive, and not in the passive sense. These
conscientious Lutherans whom the rationalist Planck
brands as "almost insane, beinahe verrueckt," were also
deposed and banished, 1562. Strigel's declaration of
March, 1562 however, maintaining that "the will is passive
in so far as God alone works all good, but active in
so far as it must be present in its conversion,must consent,
and not resist, but accept," showed that he had not
abandoned his synergism. In the same year he applied
for, and accepted, a professorship in Leipzig. Later on he
occupied a chair at the Reformed university in
Heidelberg,where he died 1569, at the age of only fortyfive
years.

In 1567, when John William became ruler of Ducal
Saxony, the Philippists were dismissed, and the banished
Lutheran pastors and professors (with the exception
of Flacius) were recalled and reinstated.While this
rehabilitation of the loyal Lutherans formally ended the
synergistic controversy in Ducal Saxony, occasional
echoes of it still lingered, due especially to the fact that
some ministers had considered Strigel's ambiguous declaration
a satisfactory presentation of the Lutheran
truth with regard to the questions involved. That the
synergistic teaching of Melanchthon was continued in
Wittenberg appears, for example, from the Confessio
Wittenbergica of 1570.

#### 160. Strigel's Rationalistic Principle.

Although at the opening of the disputation the
debaters had agreed to decide all questions by clear
Scripture-passages alone, Strigel's guiding principle was
in reality not the Bible but philosophy and reason. His
real concern was not, What does Scripture teach concerning
the causes of conversion? but,How may we harmonize
the universal grace of God with the fact that
only some are converted and saved? Self-evidently
Strigel, too, quoted Bible-passages. Among others, he
appealed to such texts as John 6, 29; Rom. 1, 16; 10, 17;
Luke 8, 18;Heb. 4, 2; Rev. 3, 20; Luke 11, 13;Mark 9, 24;
1 Thess. 2, 13; Jas. 1, 18. But as we shall show later, his
deductions were philosophical and sophistical rather
than exegetical and Scriptural. Preger remarks: In his
disputation Strigel was not able to advance a single decisive
passage of Scripture for the presence and cooperation
of a good will at the moment when it is approached
and influenced (ergriffen) by grace. (2, 211.) And the
clear, irrefutable Bible-texts on which Flacius founded
his doctrine of the inability of natural will to cooperate
in conversion, Strigel endeavored to invalidate by philosophical
reasoning, indirect arguing, and alleged necessary
logical consequences.

At Weimar and in his Confession of December 5
1560, delivered to the Duke soon after the disputation,
Strigel argued:Whoever denies that man, in a way and
measure, is able to cooperate in his own conversion is
logically compelled also to deny that the rejection of
grace may be imputed to man, compelled to make God
responsible for man's damnation; to surrender the universality
of God's grace and call; to admit contradictory
wills in God, and to take recourse to an absolute decree
of election and reprobation in order to account for the
fact that some reject the grace of God and are lost while
others are converted and saved. At Weimar Strigel
declared: "I do not say that the will is able to assent to
the Word without the Holy Spirit, but that, being
moved and assisted by the Spirit, it assents with trepidation.
If we were unable to do this, we would not be
responsible for not having received the Word. Si hoc
[utcumque assentiri inter trepidationes] non possemus,
non essemus rei propter Verbum non receptum." Again,
also at Weimar: "If the will is not able to assent in some
way, even when assisted, then we cannot be responsible
for rejecting the Word, but the blame must be transferred
to another, and others may judge how religious
that is. Si voluntas ne quidem adiuta potest aliquo modo
annuere, non possumus esse rei propter Verbum reiectum,
sed culpa est in alium transferenda quod quam sit religiosum,
alii iudicent." (Planck 4, 689. 719; Luthardt, Lehre
vom freien Willen, 222.)

Over against this rationalistic method of Strigel and
the Synergists generally, the Lutherans adhered to the
principle that nothing but a clear passage of the Bible
can decide a theological question. They rejected as false
philosophy and rationalism every argument directed
against the clear sense of a clear Word of God. They
emphatically objected to the employment of reason for
establishing a Christian doctrine or subverting a statement
of the Bible. At Weimar, Flacius protested again
and again that human reason is not an authority in theological
matters. "Let us hear the Scriptures! Audiamus
Scripturam!" "Let the woman be silent in the Church!
Mulier taceat in ecclesia!"With such slogans he brushed
aside the alleged necessary logical inferences and deductions
of Strigel. "You take your arguments from philosophy,"
he said in the second session, "which ought not
to be given a place in matters of religion. Disputas ex
philosophia, cui locus in rebus religionis esse non debet."
Again, at Weimar: "It is against the nature of inquiring
truth to insist on arguing from blind philosophy. What
else corrupted such ancient theologians as Clement,
Origen, Chrysostom, and afterwards also the Sophists
[scholastic theologians] but that they endeavored to
decide spiritual things by philosophy, which does not
understand the secret and hidden mysteries of God. Est
contra naturam inquirendae veritatis, si velimus ex caeca
philosophia loqui. Quid aliud corrupit theologos veteres,
ut Clementem, Originem, Chrysosthomum et postea
etiam Sophistas, nisi quod de rebus divinis ex philosophia
voluerunt statuere, quae non intelligit abstrusissima et
occultissima mysteria Dei." "May we therefore observe
the rule of Luther: Let the woman be silent in the
Church! For what a miserable thing would it be if we
had to judge ecclesiastical matters from logic! Ita que
observemus legem Lutheri: Taceat mulier in ecclesia! Quae
enim miseria, si ex dialectica diiudicandae nobis essent res
ecclesiae!" (Planck 4, 709.)

In an antisynergistic confession published by
Schluesselburg, we read: "This doctrine [of conversion
by God's grace alone] is simple, clear, certain, and
irrefutable if one looks to God's Word alone and derives
the Nosce teipsum, Know thyself, from the wisdom of
God.But since poor men are blind, they love their darkness
more than the light, as Christ says John 3, and insist
on criticizing and falsifying God's truth by means of
blind philosophy, which, forsooth, is a shame and a palpable
sin, if we but had eyes to see and know ...
Whatsoever blind reason produces in such articles of
faith against the Word of God is false and wrong. For it
is said: Mulier in ecclesia taceat! Let philosophy and
human wisdom be silent in the Church." (Catalogus 5,
665f.) Here, too, the sophistical objections of the
Synergists are disposed of with such remarks as: "In the
first place, this is but spun from reason, which thus acts
wise in these matters.Denn fuers erste ist solches nur aus
der Vernunft gesponnen, die weiss also hierin zu kluegeln."
(668.) "This is all spun from reason; but God's Word
teaches us better.Dies ist alles aus der Vernunft spintisiert;
Gottes Wort aber lehrt es besser." (670.)

Evidently Strigel's rationalistic method was identical
with that employed by Melanchthon in his Loci, by
Pfeffinger, and the Synergists generally. Accordingly, his
synergism also could not differ essentially from
Melanchthon's. Planck pertinently remarks:"It is apparent
from this [argument of Strigel that natural man
must have power to cooperate in his conversion because
otherwise God would be responsible for his resistance
and damnation] that his synergism was none other
than that of the Wittenberg school; for was not this the
identical foundation upon which Melanchthon had
reared his [synergism]?" (4, 690.) Like methods lead to
the same results, and vice versa. Besides, Strigel had
always appealed to the Wittenbergers; and in his
Opinion on the Weimar Confutation 1559,
Melanchthon, in turn, identified himself with Strigel's
arguments. (C. R. 9, 766.) The "Confession and
Opinion of the Wittenbergers Concerning Free Will-
Confessio et Sententia Wittebergensium de Libero
Arbitrio" of 1561 also maintained the same attitude.

#### 161. Strigel's Theory.

Strigel's views concerning the freedom of man's will
in spiritual matters may be summarized as follows:
Man, having a will, is a free agent, hence always able to
decide for or against. This ability is the "mode of action"
essential to man as long as he really is a man and in possession
of a will. Even in matters pertaining to grace this
freedom was not entirely lost in the Fall. It was impeded
and weakened by original sin, but not annihilated.To
be converted, man therefore requires that these residual
or remaining powers be excited and strengthened rather
than that new spiritual powers be imparted or a new
will be created. Accordingly, persuasion through the
Word is the method of conversion employed by the
Holy Spirit.When the will is approached by the Word,
incited and assisted by the Spirit, it is able to admit the
operations of the Spirit and assent to the Word, though
but feebly. Hence, no matter how much of the work of
conversion must be ascribed to the Holy Spirit and the
Word the will itself, in the last analysis, decides for or
against grace.Man is, therefore, not purely passive in his
conversion, but cooperates with the Holy Spirit and the
Word, not merely after, but also in his conversion,
before he has received the gift of faith.

"God who, outside of His essence in external
actions, is the freest agent," said Strigel "created two
kinds of natures, the one free, the other acting naturally
(naturaliter agentes). The free natures are the angels and
men. Those acting naturally embrace all the rest of the
creatures. A natural agent is one that cannot do anything
else [than it does], nor suspend its action e.g., fire.
Men and angels were created differently, after the image
of God, that they might be free agents.Homines et angeli
aliter conditi sunt ad imaginem Dei, ut sint liberum
agens." (Planck 4, 669.) This freedom, which distinguishes
man essentially from all other creatures, according
to Strigel, always implies the power to will or not to
will with respect to any object.He says: The act of willing,
be it good or evil, always belongs to the will,because
the will is so created that it can will or not,without coercion.
"Ipsum velle, seu bonum seu malum, quod ad substantiam
attinet, semper est voluntatis; quia voluntas sic
est condita, ut possit velle aut non; sed etiam hoc habet
voluntas ex opere creationis quod adhuc reliquum, et non
prorsus abolitum et extinctum est, UT POSSIT VELLE AUT
NON SINE COACTIONE." (674.) According to Strigel, the
very essence of the will consists in being able, in every
instance, to decide in either direction, for or against.
Hence the very idea of will involves also a certain ability
to cooperate in conversion. (689.)

This freedom or ability to decide pro or con, says
Strigel, is the mode of action essential to man, his mode
of action also in conversion. And in the controversy on
free will he sought to maintain that this alleged mode of
action was a part of the very essence of the human will
and being.At Weimar Strigel declared: "I do not wish to
detract from the will the mode of action which is different
from other natural actions. Nolo voluntati detrahi
modum agendi, qui est dissimilis aliis actionibus naturalibus."
(Planck 4, 668.) Again: "The will is not a natural,
but a free agent; hence the will is converted not as a natural
agent, but as a free agent ... In conversion the will
acts in its own mode; it is not a statue or a log in conversion.
Hence conversion does not occur in a purely
passive manner. Voluntas non est agens naturale, sed
liberum; ergo convertitur voluntas non ut naturaliter
agens, sed ut liberum agens ... Et voluntas suo modo agit
in conversione, nec est statua vel truncus in conversione. Et
per consequens non fit conversio pure passive." (Luthardt,
217. 219. 209.)

What Strigel means is that man, being a free agent,
must, also in conversion, be accorded the ability somehow
to decide for grace. According to the Formula of
Concord the words, "man's mode of action," signify "a
way of working something good and salutary in divine
things." (905, 61.) The connection and the manner in
which the phrase was employed by Strigel admitted of
no other interpretation. Strigel added: This mode of
action marks the difference between the will of man and
the will of Satan, for the devil neither endeavors to
assent, nor prays to God for assistance, while man does.
(Luthardt 220.) Natural man is by Strigel credited with
the power of "endeavoring to assent, conari assentiri,"
because he is endowed with a will. But shrewd as Strigel
was, it did not occur to him that, logically, his argument
compelled him to ascribe also to the devils everything
he claimed for natural man, since they, too, have a will
and are therefore endowed with the same modus agendi,
which, according to Strigel, belongs to the very idea
and essence of will. Yet this palpable truth, which overthrew
his entire theory, failed to open the eyes of Strigel.

If, as Strigel maintained, the human will, by virtue
of its nature as a free agent, is, in a way, able to cooperate
in conversion, then the only question is how to elevate
this ability to an actuality, in other words, how to
influence the will and rouse its powers to move in the
right direction. Strigel answered: Since the will cannot
be forced,moral suasion is the true method required to
convert a man. "The will," says he "cannot be forced,
hence it is by persuasion, i.e., by pointing out something
good or evil, that the will is moved to obey and to submit
to the Gospel, not coerced, but somehow willing.
Voluntas non potest cogi, ergo voluntas persuadendo, id est
ostensione alicuius boni vel mali flectitur ad obediendum
et obtemperandum evangelio, non coacta, sed ALIQUO
MODO VOLENS." (Seeberg 4 491.) Again: "Although God
is efficacious through the Word, drawing and leading us
efficaciously, yet He does not make assenting necessary
for such a nature as the will,-a nature so created that it
is able not to assent, if it so wills, and to expel Him who
dwells in us. This assent therefore is the work of God
and the Holy Spirit, but in so far as it is a free assent, not
coerced and pressed out by force, it is also the work of
the will. Etiam si Deus est efficax per Verbum et efficaciter
nos trahit et ducit, tamen non affert necessitatem assentiendi
tali naturae, qualis est voluntas, id est, quae sic est
condita, ut possit non assentiri, si velit, et excutere sessorem.
Est igitur hic assensus opus Dei et Spiritus Sancti,
sed quatenus est liber assensus, non coactus, expressus vi,
EST ETIAM VOLUNTATIS." (491.) Strigel evidently means:
The fact that man is able not to assent to grace of necessity
involves that somehow (aliquo modo) he is able also
to assent, according to man's peculiar mode of action
(freedom) he must himself actualize his conversion by
previously (in the logical order) willing it, deciding for
it, and assenting to it; he would be converted by coercion
if his assent to grace were an act of the will engendered
and created solely by God, rather than an act
effected and produced by the powers of the will when
incited and assisted by the Spirit. Man is converted by
persuasion only,because God does not create assent and
faith in him but merely elicits these acts from man by
liberating and appealing to the powers of his will to
effect and produce them.

In defending this freedom of the will, Strigel
appealed also to the statement of Luther: "The will cannot
be coerced; ... if the will could be coerced, it would
not be volition, but rather nolition. Voluntas non potest
cogi ... si posset cogi voluntas, non esset voluntas sed potius
voluntas." However, what Luther said of the form or
nature of the will, according to which it always really
wills what it wills, and is therefore never coerced, was by
Strigel transferred to the spiritual matters and objects of
the will.According to Strigel's theory, says Seeberg, "the
will must be free even in the first moment of conversion,
free not only in the psychological, but also in the
moral sense." (4, 492.) Tschackert, quoting Seeberg
remarks that Strigel transformed the natural formal liberty
into an ethical material liberty-"indem die natuerliche
formale Freiheit sich ihm unter der Hand [?] verwandelte
in die ethische materiale Freiheit." (524.)

#### 162. Strigel's Semi-Pelagianism.

Strigel's entire position is based on the error that a
remnant of spiritual ability still remains in natural man.
True, he taught that in consequence of original sin the
powers of man and the proper use and exercise of these
powers are greatly impeded, weakened, checked, and
insulated, as it were, and that this impediment can be
removed solely by the operation of the Holy Spirit.
"Through the Word the Holy Spirit restores to the will
the power and faculty of believing," Strigel declared.
(Luthardt, 250.) But this restoration, he said, was
brought about by liberating, arousing, inciting, and
strengthening the powers inherent in man rather than
by divine impartation of new spiritual powers or by the
creation of a new good volition Strigel plainly denied
that natural man is truly spiritually dead. He declared:
"The will is so created that it can expel the Holy Spirit
and the Word, or, when assisted by the Holy Spirit, can
in some manner will and obey-to receive is the act of
the will; in this I cannot concede that man is simply
dead-accipere est hominis; in hoc non possum concedere
simpliciter mortuum esse hominem." (Frank 1, 199.)
Natural man, Strigel explained, is indeed not able to
grasp the helping hand of God with his own hand; yet
the latter is not dead, but still retains a minimum of
power. (678.) Again: Man is like a new-born child,
whose powers must first be strengthened with nourishment
given it by its mother, and which, though able to
draw this nourishment out of its mother's breast, is yet
unable to lift itself up to it, or to take hold of the breast,
unless it be given it. (Preger 2, 209.)

With special reference to the last illustration,
Flacius declared: "Strigel, accordingly, holds that we
have the faculty to desire and receive the food, i.e., the
benefits of God. Forsooth, you thereby attribute to corrupt
man a very great power with respect to spiritual
things. Now, then, deny that this opinion is Pelagian."
(209.) "Your statements agree with those of Pelagius, yet
I do not simply say that you are a Pelagian; for a good
man may fall into an error which he does not see."
Pelagius held that man, by his natural powers, is able to
begin and complete his own conversion; Cassianus, the
Semi-Pelagian taught that man is able merely to begin
this work; Strigel maintained that man can admit the
liberating operation of the Holy Spirit, and that after
such operation of the Spirit he is able to cooperate with
his natural powers.Evidently, then, the verdict of Flacius
was not much beside the mark. Planck though unwilling
to relegate Strigel to the Pelagians, does not hesitate
to put him down as a thoroughgoing Synergist. (Planck
4, 683f.) Synergism, however, always includes at least an
element of Pelagianism.

Strigel illustrated his idea by the following analogy.
When garlic-juice is applied to a magnet, it loses its
power of attraction, but remains a true magnet, and,
when goat's blood is applied, immediately regains its
efficaciousness. So the will of man is hindered by original
sin from beginning that which is good; but when the
impediment has been removed through the operation
of the Holy Spirit, the native powers of the will again
become efficacious and active. (Tschackert, 524; Planck
4, 672; Preger 2, 198; Luthardt, 211.) Frank remarks:
"The example of the temporarily impeded power of the
magnet, which was repeated also at this juncture [in the
disputation at Weimar], immediately points to the
related papal doctrine, for the Catholic Andradius
explains the dogma of the Tridentinum to this effect:
The free will of natural man may be compared to a
chained prisoner who, though still in possession of his
locomotive powers, is nevertheless impeded by his fetters."
(1, 136.) Also the Formula of Concord, evidently
with a squint at Strigel, rejects as a Pelagian error the
teaching "that original sin is not a despoliation or deficiency
but only an external impediment to these spiritual
good powers, as when a magnet is smeared with
garlic-juice, whereby its natural power is not removed,
but only hindered or that this stain can be easily washed
away as a spot from the face or a pigment from the wall."
(865, 22.)

#### 163. Strigel's "Cooperation."

When the impediment caused by original sin has
been removed, and the will liberated and aroused to
activity, man, according to Strigel, is able also to cooperate
in his conversion. At Weimar he formulated the
point at issue as follows: "The question is whether [in
conversion] the will is present idle, as an inactive, indolent
subject, or, as the common saying is, in a purely passive
way; or whether, when grace precedes, the will follows
the efficacy of the Holy Spirit, and in some manner
assents-an vero praeeunte gratia voluntas comitetur
efficaciam Spiritus Sancti et aliquo modo annuat."
(Luthardt, 222.) Following are some of his answers to
this question:When incited by the Spirit, the will is able
to assent somewhat and to pray for assistance. Inter trepidationem
utcumque assentitur, simul petens auxilium.
Contrition and faith, as well as other virtues, are gifts of
God, "but they are given to those only who hear and
contemplate God's Word, embrace it by assenting to it,
strive against their doubts and in this conflict pray for
the help of God." (230.) The Holy Ghost converts those
"who hear the Word of God and do not resist stubbornly,
but consent," and God assists such only "as follow
His call and pray for assistance." (229.) "The will
and heart do not resist altogether, but desire divine consolation,
when, indeed, they are assisted by the Holy
Ghost.""The will is neither idle nor contumacious; but,
in a manner, desires to obey." (Planck 4, 682.) "Man is
dead [spiritually] in as far as he is not able to heal his
wounds with his own powers; but when the remedy is
offered him by the Holy Spirit and the Word, then he, at
least in receiving the benefit, is not altogether dead; for
otherwise a conversion could not occur. For I cannot
conceive a conversion where the process is that of the
flame consuming straw (denn ich kann mir keine
Bekehrung vorstellen, bei der es zugeht, wie wenn die
Flamme das Stroh ergreift). The nature of the will is such
that it can reject the Holy Spirit and the Word; or, being
supported by the Holy Spirit, can in a manner will and
obey. The remedy is heavenly and divine, but the will-
not the will alone, but the will supported by the Holy
Spirit-is able to accept it. One must ascribe at least a
feeble consent and an ．Aye' to the will, which is already
supported by the Holy Spirit." (Preger 2, 208.) "In a
betrothal, consent is necessary; conversion is a betrothal
of Christ to the Church and its individual members;
hence consent is required," which the will is able to give
when assisted by the Holy Spirit. (Luthardt, 224.)

It is, however, only a languid, wavering, and weak
consent which man is able to render (qualiscumque
assensio languida, trepida et imbecilla)."Compared with
the divine operation," Flacius reports Strigel as having
said, "the cooperation of our powers in conversion is
something extremely small (quiddam pertenue prorsus).
If, after drinking with a rich man, he paying a taler and
I a heller, I would afterwards boast that I had been
drinking and paying with him-such is cooperation,
talis est synergia." (Planck 4, 677; Luthardt, 220. 222.)
According to Strigel, therefore, man is not purely passive,
but plays an active part in his conversion. With
Melanchthon and Pfeffinger he maintained: "These
three concur in conversion: the Holy Spirit, who moves
the hearts; the voice of God; the will of man, which
assents to the divine voice. Concurrunt in conversione
haec tria: Spiritus Sanctus movens corda, vow Dei, voluntas
hominis, quae voci divinae assentitur." (Tschackert,
524.)

Flacius declared with respect to the issue formulated
by Strigel: "I explain my entire view as follows:Man
is purely passive (homo se habet pure passive). If you
consider the native faculty of the will, its willing and its
powers, then he is purely passive when he receives (in
accipiendo). But if that divinely bestowed willing or
spark of faith kindled by the Spirit is considered, then
this imparted willing and this spark is not purely passive.
But the Adamic will does not only not operate or
cooperate, but, according to the inborn malice of the
heart, even operates contrarily (1)." (Planck 4, 697.)
Thus Flacius clearly distinguished between cooperation
before conversion (which he rejected absolutely) and
cooperation after conversion (which he allowed). And
pressing this point, he said to Strigel: "I ask whether you
say that the will cooperates before the gift of faith or after
faith has been received whether you say that the will
cooperates from natural powers, or in so far as the good
volition has been bestowed by the renovation of the
Holy Spirit. Quaero, an dicas, voluntatem cooperari ante
donum fidei aut post acceptam fidem; an dicas, cooperari
ex naturalibus viribus aut quatenus ex renovatione
Spiritus Sancti datum est bene velle." (Seeberg 4, 492.)
Again: I shall withdraw the charge of Pelagianism if you
will declare it as your opinion "that only the regenerated,
sanctified, renewed will cooperates, and not the
other human, carnal, natural will.""Confess openly and
expressly and say clearly: ．I affirm that man cooperates
from faith and the good will bestowed by God, not from
the will he brings with him from his natural Adam-
quod homo cooperetur ex fide et bono velle divinitus
donato, non ex eo, quod attulit ex suo naturali Adamo.' "
"We say, Only the regenerate will cooperates; if you
[Strigel] say the same, the controversy is at an end."
Strigel, however, who, to use a phrase of Luther (St. L.
18, 1673), was just as hard to catch as Proteus of old, did
not reply with a definite yes or no, but repeated that it
was only a weak assent (qualiscumque assensio languida
trepida et imbecilla) which man was able to render when
his will was incited and supported by the prevenient
grace of the Holy Spirit. (Preger 2, 217; Luthardt, 217.
222. 227; Frank 1, 115.)

#### 164.Objections Answered.

At Weimar, Strigel insisted: The human will must
not be eliminated as one of the causes of conversion; for
without man's will and intellect no conversion is possible.
Flacius replied: The will, indeed, is present in conversion,
for it is the will that is converted and experiences
conversion; but the inborn power of the natural
will contributes nothing to conversion, and therefore
the will "is purely passive in the reception of grace."
(Preger 2, 217.) "We are pressed hard with the sophistical
objection that man is not converted without his
knowledge and will. But who doubts this? The entire
question is: Whence does that good knowledge originate?
Whence does that good volition originate?" (216.)
"We certainly admit that in conversion there are many
motions of the intellect and will, good and bad. But the
dispute among us is not whether in conversion the
intellect understands and the will wills; but whence is
the capability to think right, and whence is that good
willing of the will? Is it of us, as of ourselves, or is this
sufficiency of willing and thinking of God alone?"
(Planck 4, 711.) The fact that God alone converts man,
said Flacius, "does not exclude the presence of the will;
but it does exclude all efficaciousness and operation of
the natural will in conversion (non excludit voluntatem,
ne adsit, sed excludit omnem efficaciam et operationem
naturalise voluntatis in conversione)." (Seeberg 4, 492.)

In order to prove man's cooperation in conversion,
Strigel declared: "Both [to will and to perform] are in
some way acts of God and of ourselves; for no willing
and performing takes place unless we will. Utrumque
[velle et perficere] aliquo modo Dei et nostrum est non fit
velle aut perficere nisi nobis volentibus." Charging Strigel
with ambiguity, Flacius replied: "You speak of one kind
of synergism and we of another.You cannot affirm with
a good conscience that these questions are unknown to
you."Strigel,protesting that he was unable to see the difference,
answered: "For God's sake, have a little forbearance
with me, I cannot see the difference. If that is to my
discredit, let it be to my discredit.-Bitte um Gottes
willen, man wolle mir's zugut halten; ich kann's nicht
ausmessen. Ist mir's eine Schand', so sei mir's eine
Schand'." (Frank 1, 136.) Strigel, however, evidently
meant that man, too, has a share in producing the good
volition, while Flacius understood the phraseology as
Luther and Augustine explained it, the latter, e.g., writing
in De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio: "It is certain that we
will when we will; but He who makes us will is He of
whom it is written: It is God who worketh in us to will.
Certum est nos velle cum volumus; sed ille facit, ut
velimus, de quo_____________Deus est, qui operatur in
nobis velle." (Frank 1, 238.) In his objections to the doctrine
that man is purely passive in his conversion, Strigel
protested again and again that man is not like a block or
stone when he is converted. "That is true," said Flacius,
"for a block can neither love nor hate God, while man
by nature hates God, and scoffs at Him. Rom. 8:1; 1 Cor.
2. Thus God is dealing with one whose will and heart is
altogether against Him.But here [in the denial that man
is purely passive in conversion] is buried a popish meritum
de congruo and a particle of free will." (Preger 2,
191.) Flacius furthermore explained that in his conversion
man is able to cooperate just as little as a stone can
contribute to its transformation into a statue. Indeed,
man's condition is even more miserable than that of a
stone or block (miserior trunco), because by his natural
powers he resists, and cannot but resist, the operations
of the Spirit. (Planck 4, 696f.)

Strigel reasoned: If man is converted without his
consent, and if he cannot but resist the operations of the
Holy Spirit, conversion is an impossibility, a contradiction.
He said:"If the will, even when assisted by the Holy
Spirit, is unable to assent, it must of necessity resist Him
perpetually, drive out, reject, and repudiate the Word
and Holy Spirit; for it is impossible that motions
extremely conflicting and contradictory, the one
embracing, the other repudiating and persistently
rejecting, should be in the same will. Si voluntas etiam
adiuta a Spiritu Sancto non potest assentiri, necesse est, ut
perpetuo ei repugnet, ut excutiat, reiiciat et repudiet
Verbum et Spiritum Sanctum. Nam impossibile est in
eadem voluntate esse motus extreme pugnantes et contradictorios,
quorum alter est amplecti, alter repudiare et
quidem perstare in reiectione." Flacius replied: You need
but distinguish between the sinful natural will inherited
from Adam, which always resists, and the new consenting
will implanted by God in conversion. "Man consents
with the faith given by God, but he resists with the
inborn wickedness of his Old Adam."Your error is that
you acknowledge only an inciting grace, which mere
incitation presupposes powers of one's own to do and
to perform (talis incitatio includit proprias vires ad perficiendum).
"I plead," said Flacius, "that by original sin
man is not only wounded, but, as the Scriptures affirm,
entirely dead, and his faculties to do that which is good
have been destroyed; on the other hand, however, he is
alive and vigorous toward evil (hominem ... penitus esse
mortuum, extinctum et interfectum ad bonum et contra
insuper vivum et vigentem ad malum).""The will is free
with respect to things beneath itself, but not with
respect to things above itself. In spiritual matters it is a
servant of Satan."Hence, said Flacius, in order to cooperate,
new spiritual life must first be imparted to, and
created in, man by the grace of God. (Planck 4, 693ff.;
Frank 1, 224ff., Luthardt, 224; Preger 2, 216)

Strigel argued: If man is able only to sin and to resist
the grace of God, he cannot be held accountable for his
actions. But Flacius replied: "Also the non-regenerate
are justly accused [made responsible for their actions]
for with the remnant of the carnal liberty they are able
at least to observe external decency (Zucht), which God
earnestly demands of us, for example, to hear God's
Word, to go to church more frequently than into the
tavern.""Furthermore, there are many carnal transgressions
in which natural man could have done something
which he has not done." "God may justly hold us
responsible also with respect to things which we are
unable to do because He has bestowed uninjured powers
upon the human race, which, though forewarned,
man has shamefully lost through his own fault." (Preger
2, 214f.)

Time and again Strigel told Flacius that according
to his doctrine man is coerced to sin and compelled to
resist the grace of God. But the latter replied: As far as
his own powers are concerned, the natural will of man
indeed sins and resists inevitably and of necessity (voluntas
repugnat necessario et inevitabiliter), but not by
coercion or compulsion. Necessity to resist (necessitas
repugnandi), Flacius explained, does not involve coercion
to resist (coactio repugnandi), since there is such a
thing as a necessity of immutability (necessitas
immutabilitatis), that is to say,man may be unable to act
otherwise and yet act willingly. The impossibility of
being able to will otherwise than one really wills, does,
according to Flacius, not at all involve coercion or compulsion.
The holy angels are free from compulsion,
although they cannot sin or fall any more. It is the highest
degree of freedom and Christian perfection when, in
the life to come, our will to remain in union with God
is elevated to immutability of so willing. Again, though
Satan cannot but sin, yet he is not coerced to sin. Thus
too, of his own powers, natural man is able only to resist
grace, yet there is no compulsion involved. The fact,
therefore, that natural man cannot but sin and resist
grace does not warrant the inference that he is compelled
to sin; nor does the fact that natural man is not
coerced to resist prove that he is able also to assent to
grace. The fact, said Flacius, that the wicked willingly
will, think, and do only what pleases Satan does not
prove an ability to will in the opposite spiritual direction,
but merely reveals the terrible extent of Satan's
tyrannical power over natural man. (Luthardt 224.
231.) According to Flacius the will always wills willingly
when it wills and what it wills. In brief: The categories
"coercion" and "compulsion" cannot be applied to the
will. This, however, does not imply that God is not able
to create or restore a good will without coercion or
compulsion. There was no coercion or compulsion
involved when God, creating Adam,Eve, and the angels,
endowed them with a good will. Nor is there any such
thing as coercion or compulsion when God, in conversion,
bestows faith and a good will upon man.

In his statements on the freedom of the will, Flacius
merely repeated what Luther had written before him, in
De Servo Arbitrio: "For if it is not we, but God alone,
who works salvation in us, then nothing that we do previous
to His work, whether we will or not, is salutary.
But when I say,．by necessity,' I do not mean by coercion,
but, as they say by the necessity of immutability, not by
necessity of coercion, i.e., man, destitute of the Spirit of
God, does not sin perforce, as though seized by the neck
[stretched upon the rack] nor unwillingly, as a thief or
robber is led to his punishment but spontaneously and
willingly. And by his own strength he cannot omit,
restrain, or change this desire or willingness to sin, but
continues to will it and to find pleasure in it. For even if
he is compelled by force, outwardly to do something
else, within, the will nevertheless remains averse, and
rages against him who compels or resists it.For if it were
changed and willingly yielded to force, it would not be
angry.And this we call the necessity of immutability, i.e.,
the will cannot change itself and turn to something else,
but is rather provoked to will more intensely by being
resisted, as is proved by its indignation. Si enim non nos,
sed solus Deus operatur salutem in nobis, nihil ante opus
eius operamur salutare, velimus nolimus. Necessario vero
dico, NON COACTE, sed, ut illi dicunt, necessitate
immutabilitatis, NONCOACTIONIS; id est homo cum vacat
Spiritu Dei, NON QUIDEM VIOLENTIA, velut raptus obtorto
collo, NOLENS facit peccatum, quemadmodum fur aut
latro nolens ad poenam ducitur, sed sponte et libenti voluntate
facit. Verum hanc libentiam seu voluntatem
faciendi non potest suis viribus omittere, coercere aut
mutare, sed pergit volendo et lubendo; etiamsi ad extra
cogatur aliud facere per vim, tamen voluntas intus manet
aversa et indignatur cogenti aut resistenti. Non enim
indignaretur, si mutaretur ac volens vim sequeretur. Hoc
vocamus modo necessitatem immutabilitatis, id est, quod
voluntas sese mutare et vertere alio non possit, sed potius
irritetur magis ad volendum, dum ei resistitur, quod probat
eius indignatio." (E. v. a. 7, 155f. 134. 157; St. L. 18
1717. 1692. 1718.)

Flacius was also charged with teaching that "man is
converted resisting (hominem converti repugnantem)."
In their Confession and Opinion Concerning Free Will, of
1561, the Wittenberg theologians repeated the assertion
that Flacius taught "converti hominem... repugnantem et
hostiliter Deo convertenti adversantem." (Planck 4, 688.)
But Flacius protested: "I do not simply say that man is
converted resisting (hominem repugnantem converti).
But I say that he resists with respect to his natural and
carnal free will." "It is not denied that God converts us
as willing and understanding (quin Deus nos convertat
volentes et intelligentes), but willing and understanding
not from the Old Adam but from the light given by God
and from the good volition bestowed through the Word
and the Holy Spirit." (692.) "Man is converted or drawn
by the Father to the Son not as a thief is cast into prison,
but in such a manner that his evil will is changed into a
good will by the power of the Holy Spirit." (Preger 2,
218.) It is the very essence of conversion that by the
grace of God unwilling men are made willing.

In support of his error that natural man is able to
cooperate in his conversion Strigel appealed to Rom. 8:26:
"Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities,"
etc., and appealing to the Augustana for the correctness
of his interpretation, he declared that this passage
proves that one may speak of a languid and weak assent
in man even before he is endowed with faith. Flacius
replied that this Bible-passage referred to such only as
are already converted, and that Strigel's interpretation
was found not in the original Augustana, but in the
Variata.-From the admonition 2 Cor. 5, 20:"Be ye reconciled
to God," Strigel inferred that free will must to a
certain extent be capable of accepting the grace offered
by God. Flacius answered that it was a logical fallacy,
conflicting also with the clear Word of God, to conclude
that man by his own powers is able to perform something
because God demands it and admonishes and
urges us to do it.-From Acts 5, 32: " ... the Holy Ghost,
whom God hath given to them that obey Him," Strigel
argued that the will is able to consent to the Holy Spirit.
But Flacius rejoined that this passage refers to special
gifts bestowed upon such as are already converted.-In
support of his synergism, Strigel also appealed to the
Parable of the Prodigal Son, who himself repented and
returned to his father. But Flacius answered: If every
detail of this parable taken from every-day life were to
be interpreted in such a manner, Strigel would have to
abandon his own teaching concerning prevenient grace,
since according to the parable the repentance and
return of the son precedes the grace bestowed by the
father. (Preger 2, 210f.)

#### 165. Teaching of the Anti-Synergists.

While the Philippists, also in the Synergistic
Controversy, endeavored to supplant the authority and
doctrine of Luther by that ofMelanchthon, their opponents,
Amsdorf, Flacius,Wigand, Hesshusius, and others
(though not always fortunate in the choice of their
phraseology), stood four-square on Luther's teaching of
the sola gratia, which, they were fully convinced, was
nothing but the pure truth of the Gospel itself. They
maintained that, as a result of the Fall, man has lost his
original holiness and righteousness or the image of
God; that both as to his intellect and will he is totally
corrupt spiritually; that of his own powers he is utterly
unable to think or will anything that is truly good; that
not a spark of spiritual life is found in natural man by
virtue of which he might assent to the Gospel or cooperate
with the Holy Spirit in his conversion; that his carnal
mind is enmity toward God; that of his own powers
he is active only in resisting the work of the Holy Spirit,
nor is he able to do otherwise; that such resistance continues
until he is converted and a new will and heart
have been created in him; that conversion consists in
this, that men who by nature are unwilling and resist
God's grace become such as willingly consent and obey
the Gospel and the Holy Spirit; that this is done solely
by God's grace, through Word and Sacrament; that man
is purely passive in his conversion, inasmuch as he contributes
nothing towards it, and merely suffers and
experiences the work of the Holy Spirit; that only after
his conversion man is able to cooperate with the Holy
Spirit; that such cooperation, however, flows not from
innate powers of the natural will, but from the new
powers imparted in conversion; that also in the converted
the natural sinful will continues to oppose whatever
is truly good, thus causing a conflict between the
flesh and the spirit which lasts till death; in brief, that
man's conversion and salvation are due to grace alone
and in no respect whatever to man and his natural powers.

The Book of Confutation, of 1559, drafted, as stated
above, by the theologians of Jena, designates the synergistic
dogma as a "rejection of grace."Here we also meet
with statements such as the following: Human nature
"is altogether turned aside from God, and is hostile
toward Him and subject to the tyranny of sin and Satan
(naturam humanam prorsus a Deo aversam eique inimicam
et tyrannidi peccati ac Satanae subiectam esse)." It is
impossible for the unregenerate man "to understand or
to apprehend the will of God revealed in the Word, or
by his own power to convert himself to God and to will
or perform anything good (homini non renato impossibile
esse intelligere aut apprehendere voluntatem Dei in
Verbo patefactam aut sua ipsius voluntate ad Deum se
convertere, boni aliquid velle aut perficere).""Our will to
obey God or to choose the good is utterly extinguished
and corrupted. Voluntas nostra ad Dei obedientiam aut
ad bonum eligendum prorsus extincta et depravata est."
(Tschackert, 523; Gieseler 3, 2, 229.)

The second of the Propositions prepared by Simon
Musaeus and Flacius for the Disputation at Weimar,
1560, reads: "Corrupt man cannot operate or cooperate
toward anything good by true motions, and such as
proceed from the heart; for his heart is altogether dead
spiritually, and has utterly lost the image of God, or all
powers and inclinations toward that which is good.
Homo corruptus nihil boni potest veris ac ex corde proficiscentibus
motibus operari aut cooperari, nom plane est
spiritualiter mortuus et Dei imaginem seu omnes bonas
vires et inclinationes prorsus amisit." The third: Not only
"has he lost entirely all good powers, but, in addition, he
has also acquired contrary and most evil powers, ... so
that, of necessity or inevitably, he constantly and vehemently
opposes God and true piety ita ut necessario seu
inevitabiliter Deo ac verae pietati semper et vehementer
adversetur." The fourth thesis states that God alone,
through His Word and the Holy Spirit, converts, draws,
and illumines man, kindles faith, justifies, renews, and
creates him unto good works, while natural or Adamic
free will is of itself not only inactive, but resists (non
solum non cooperante ex se naturali aut Adamico libero
arbitrio, sed etiam contra furente ac fremente). (Planck 4,
692; Gieseler 3, 2, 245.)

The same position was occupied by the Mansfeld
ministers in a statement of August 20, 1562, and by
Hesshusius in his Confutation of the Arguments by which
the Synergists Endeavor to Defend Their Error
Concerning the Powers of the Dead Free Will. They held
that in his conversion man is purely passive and has no
mode of action whatever; that he is but the passive subject
who is to be converted (subiectam patiens, subiectum
convertendum); that he contributes no more to his
conversion than an infant to its own formation in the
womb of its mother; that he is passive, like a block, inasmuch
as he does not in any way cooperate, but at the
same time differs from, and is worse than, a block,
because he is active in resisting the Holy Spirit until he
has been converted. The Confession presented by the
theologians of Ducal Saxony (Wigand, Coelestinus,
Irenaeus, Rosinus, Kirchner, etc.) at the Altenburg
Colloquy March, 1569, occupies the same doctrinal
position. As stated before, these theologians made it a
special point also to declare their agreement with
Luther's book De Servo Arbitrio. (Schluesselburg 5, 316.
133.)

#### 166.Attitude of Formula of Concord.

The second article of the Formula of Concord,
which decided the questions involved in the Synergistic
Controversy, takes a clear, determined, and consistent
stand against all forms and formulas of synergism. At
the same time it avoids all extravagant, improper, offensive,
and inadequate terms and phrases, as well as the
numerous pitfalls lurking everywhere in the questions
concerning free will, against which also some of the
opponents of the Synergists had not always sufficiently
been on their guard. Article II teaches "that original sin
is an unspeakable evil and such an entire corruption of
human nature that in it and all its internal and external
powers nothing pure or good remains, but everything is
entirely corrupt, so that on account of original sin man
is in God's sight truly spiritually dead, with all his powers
dead to that which is good (dass der Mensch durch
die Erbsuende wahrhaftig vor Gott geistlich tot und zum
Guten mit allen seinen Kraeften erstorben sei) "(CONC.
TRIGL. 879, 60); "that in spiritual and divine things the
intellect, heart, and will of the unregenerate man are
utterly unable, by their own natural powers, to understand,
believe, accept, think, will, begin, effect, work, or
concur in working, anything, but they are entirely dead
to what is good, and corrupt, so that in man's nature
since the Fall, before regeneration, there is not the least
spark of spiritual power remaining, nor present, by
which, of himself, he can prepare himself for God's
grace, or accept the offered grace, nor be capable of it for
and of himself, or apply or accommodate himself thereto,
or by his own powers be able of himself, as of himself,
to aid, do, work, or concur in working anything
towards his conversion either wholly, or half, or in any,
even the least or most inconsiderable part; but that he is
the servant [and slave] of sin, John 8, 34, and a captive
of the devil, by whom he is moved, Eph. 2, 2; 2 Tim. 2,
26. Hence natural free will according to its perverted
disposition and nature is strong and active only with
respect to what is displeasing and contrary to God"
(883, 7; 887, 17); that "before man is enlightened, converted,
regenerated, renewed and drawn by the Holy
Spirit he can of himself and of his own natural powers
begin work,or concur in working in spiritual things and
in his own conversion or regeneration just as little as a
stone or a block or clay." (891, 24)-that, moreover, "in
this respect" [inasmuch as man resists the Holy Spirit]
"it may well be said that man is not a stone or block, for
a stone or block does not resist the person who moves
it, nor does it understand and is sensible of what is being
done with it, as man with his will so long resists God the
Lord until he is converted (donec ad Deum conversus
fuerit)" (905, 59); that "the Holy Scriptures ascribe conversion,
faith in Christ, regeneration, renewal, and all
that belongs to their efficacious beginning and completion,
not to the human powers of the natural free will,
neither entirely, nor half nor in any, even the least or
most inconsiderable part, but in solidum, that is, entirely
and solely, to the divine working and the Holy Spirit"
(891, 25); that "the preaching and hearing of God's
Word are instruments of the Holy Ghost, by, with, and
through which He desires to work efficaciously, and to
convert men to God, and to work in them both to will
and to do" (901, 52); that "as soon as the Holy Ghost ...
has begun in us this His work of regeneration and
renewal, it is certain that through the power of the Holy
Ghost we can and should cooperate (mitwirken),
although still in great weakness" (907, 65); that this
cooperation, however, "does not occur from our carnal
natural powers, but from the new powers and gifts
which the Holy Ghost has begun in us in conversion,"
and "is to be understood in no other way than that the
converted man does good to such an extent and so long
as God by His Holy Spirit rules, guides, and leads him,
and that as soon as God would withdraw His gracious
hand from him, he could not for a moment persevere in
obedience to God," and that hence it is not a power
independent from, and coordinated with, the Holy
Spirit, as though "the converted man cooperated with
the Holy Ghost in the manner as when two horses
together draw a wagon" (907, 66); and finally, that as to
the three-concurring-causes doctrine it is "manifest,
from the explanations presented that conversion to God
is a work of God the Holy Ghost alone, who is the true
Master that alone works this in us, for which He uses the
preaching and hearing ofHis holy Word as His ordinary
means and instrument. But the intellect and will of the
unregenerate man are nothing else than subiectum convertendum,
that is, that which is to be converted, it being
the intellect and will of a spiritually dead man, in whom
the Holy Ghost works conversion and renewal, towards
which work man's will that is to be converted does
nothing, but suffers God alone to work in him until he
is regenerated and then he [cooperates] works also with
the Holy Ghost that which is pleasing to God in other
good works that follow in the way and to the extent fully
set forth above" (915, 90).

It has been said that originally also the Formula of
Concord in its Torgau draft (Das Torgausche Buch, i.e.,
the draft preceding the Bergic Book = Formula of
Concord) contained the three-concurring-causes doctrine
ofMelanchthon and the Synergists.As a matter of
fact, however, the Torgau Book does not speak of three
causes of conversion, but of three causes in those who
are already converted,-a doctrine entirely in agreement
with the Formula of Concord, which, as shown,
plainly teaches that after conversion the will of man also
cooperates with the Holy Spirit. In the Torgau Book the
passage in question reads: "Thus also three causes concur
to effect this internal new obedience in the converted.
The first and chief cause is God Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost ... The second is God's Word ... The third is
man's intellect, enlightened by the Holy Spirit, which
ponders and understands God's command [threat and
promise], and our new and regenerate will, which is
governed by the Holy Spirit, and now desires with a glad
and willing heart (herzlich gern und willig), though in
great weakness, to submit to, and obey, the Word and
will of God." In the same sense, at the colloquy in
AItenburg, 1568 to 1569, the Jena theologians also mentioned
as a "third cause" "the mind of man, which is
regenerated and renewed, and yields to, and obeys, the
Holy Spirit and the Word of God (des Menschen
Gemuet, so wiedergeboren und erneuert ist und dem
Heiligen Geiste und Gottes Wort Folge tut und gehorsam
ist)." (Frank 1, 214f.)

