---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XV. The Flacian Controversy.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 15
---

#### 167. Flacius Entrapped by Strigel.

Matthias Flacius Illyricus, one of the most learned
and capable theologians of his day and the most faithful,
devoted, staunch, zealous, and able exponent and
defender of genuine Lutheranism, was the author of the
malignant controversy which bears his name. Flacius
was born March 3, 1520, in Illyria hence called Illyricus.
He studied in Basel, Tuebingen, and Wittenberg. At
Wittenberg he was convinced that the doctrine of the
Lutheran Church is in complete agreement with the
Word of God.Here, too, he was appointed Professor of
Hebrew in 1544. In April, 1549, he left the city on
account of the Interim. He removed to Magdeburg
where he became the energetic and successful leader of
the opponents of the Interimists and Adiaphorists. He
was appointed professor at the University of Jena,
founded 1547, partly in opposition to Philippism. In
December 1561, he and his adherents were banished
from Jena.When the latter returned in 1567, he was not
recalled. Persecuted by his enemies (especially Elector
August of Saxony) and forsaken by his friends, he now
moved from one place to another: from Jena to
Regensburg, thence to Antwerp, to Frankfort-on-the-
Main, to Strassburg (from where he was expelled in the
spring of 1573), and again to Frankfort-on-the-Main,
where he found a last asylum for himself and his family
(wife and eight children), and where he also died in a
hospital,March 11, 1575.

In the Adiaphoristic Controversy Flacius had time
and again urged the Lutherans to die rather than deny
and surrender the truth. And when in the controversy
about original sin all shunned him and turned against
him he gave ample proof of the fact that he himself was
imbued with the spirit he had endeavored to kindle in
others, being willing to suffer and to be banished and
persecuted rather than sacrifice what he believed to be
the truth.-The most important of his numerous
books are: Catalogus Testium Veritatis, qui ante nostram
aetatem reclamarunt Papae, 1556; Ecclesiastica Historia,
or the so-called Magdeburg Centuries (Centuriones),
comprising the history of the first thirteen centuries,
and published 1559-1574; Clavis Scripturae, of 1567;
and Glossa Novi Testamenti.Walther remarks: "It was a
great pity that Flacius, who had hitherto been such a
faithful champion of the pure doctrine, exposed himself
to the enemies in such a manner.Henceforth the errorists
were accustomed to brand all those as Flacianists
who were zealous in defending the pure doctrine of
Luther." (Kern und Stern, 34.)

The Flacian Controversy sprang from, and must be
regarded as an episode of, the Synergistic Controversy,
in which also some champions of Luther's theology
(Amsdorf,Wigand, Hesshusius, and others) had occasionally
employed unguarded, extreme, and inadequate
expressions. Following are some of the immoderate and
extravagant statements made by Flacius: God alone
converts man, the Adamic free will not only not cooperating,
"but also raging and roaring against it (sed
etiam contra furente ac fremente)." (Preger 2, 212.) The
malice of our free will is a "diabolical malice (nostra diabolica
malitia carnis aut liberi arbitrii)." By original sin
man is "transformed into the image of Satan (ad imaginem
Satanae transformatus, eiusque charactere [foeda
Satanae imagine] signatus)."(Gieseler 3, 2, 245.) By original
sin "the substance of man is destroyed (substantiam
hominis ablatam esse);" after the Fall original sin is the
substance of man; man's nature is identical with sin; in
conversion a new substance is created by God. In particular,
the assertions concerning the substantiality of
original sin gave rise to the so-called Flacian
Controversy. After Strigel, at the second session of the
disputation in Weimar,had dilated on the philosophical
definitions of the terms "substance" and "accident"
("accidens, quod adest vel abest praeter subiecti corruptionem"),
and had declared that original sin was an accident
which merely impeded free will in its activity,
Flacius, in the heat of the controversy, exclaimed:
"Originale peccatum non est accidens.Original sin is not
an accident, for the Scriptures call it flesh, the evil heart,"
etc. Thus he fell into the pitfall which the wily Strigel
had adroitly laid for him. Though Flacius seemed to be
loath to enter upon the matter any further, and protested
against the use of philosophical definitions in theology,
Strigel now was eager to entangle him still further,
plying him with the question: "An negas peccatum originis
esse accidens? Do you deny that original sin is an
accident?" Flacius answered: "Lutherus diserte negat esse
accidens. Luther expressly denies that it is an accident."
Strigel: "Visne negare peccatum esse accidens? Do you
mean to deny that sin is an accident?" Flacius: "Quod sit
substantia, dixi Scripturam et Lutherum affirmare. I have
said that Scripture and Luther affirm that it is a substance."
(Luthardt, 213. 216.)

After the session in which the fatal phrase had fallen
from his lips, Wigand and Musaeus expostulated
with Flacius, designating (according to later reports of
theirs) his statement as "this new, perilous, and blasphemous
proposition of the ancient Manicheans (haec
nova, periculosa et blasphema veterum Manichaeorum
propositio)." (Planck 4, 611.) Flacius declared that, "in
the sudden and pressing exigency, in the interest of
truth, and against Pelagian enthusiasm, he had taken
this expression [concerning the substantiality of original
sin] from Luther's doctrine and books." (Preger 2,
324.) In the following (third) session, however, he
repeated his error, declaring: I must stand by my statement
that original sin is not an accident, but a substance,
"because the testimonies of the Holy Scriptures
which employ terms denoting substance (quae verbis
substantialibus utuntur) are so numerous." (Planck 4,
610; Luthardt, 216.) Also later on Flacius always maintained
that his doctrine was nothing but the teaching of
the Bible and of Luther. As to Scripture-proofs, he
referred to passages in which the Scriptures designate
sin as "flesh," "stony heart," etc. Regarding the teaching
of Luther, he quoted statements in which he describes
original sin as "man's nature," "essence," "substantial
sin,""all that is born of father and mother," etc. (Preger
2, 318.)

However, the palpable mistake of Flacius was that
he took the substantial terms on which he based his theory
in their original and proper sense, while the Bible
and Luther employ them in a figurative meaning, as the
Formula of Concord carefully explains in its first article,
which decided and settled this controversy. (875, 50.)
Here we read: "Also to avoid strife about words, aequivocationes
vocabulorum, that is, words and expressions
which are applied and used in various meanings, should
be carefully and distinctly explained, as when it is said:
God creates the nature of men, there by the term nature
the essence, body, and soul of men are understood. But
often the disposition or vicious quality of a thing is
called its nature, as when it is said: It is the nature of the
serpent to bite and poison. Thus Luther says that sin
and sinning are the disposition and nature of corrupt
man. Therefore original sin properly signifies the deep
corruption of our nature as it is described in the
Smalcald Articles.But sometimes the concrete person or
the subject that is, man himself with body and soul in
which sin is and inheres, is also comprised under this
term, for the reason that man is corrupted by sin, poisoned
and sinful, as when Luther says: "'Thy birth, thy
nature, and thy entire essence is sin,' that is, sinful and
unclean. Luther himself explains that by nature-sin,
person-sin, essential sin he means that not only the
words, thoughts, and works are sin, but that the entire
nature, person and essence of man are altogether corrupted
from the root by original sin." (875, 51f.)

#### 168.Context in which Statement was Made.

In making his statement concerning the substantiality
of original sin, the purpose of Flacius was to wipe
out the last vestige of spiritual powers ascribed to natural
man by Strigel, and to emphasize the doctrine of
total corruption,which Strigel denied.His fatal blunder
was that he did so in terms which were universally
regarded as savoring of Manicheism. As was fully
explained in the chapter of the Synergistic Controversy
Strigel taught that free will, which belongs to the substance
and essence of man, and hence cannot be lost
without the annihilation of man himself, always
includes the capacity to choose in both directions, that
also with respect to divine grace and the operations of
the Holy Spirit man is and always remains a liberum
agens in the sense that he is able to decide in utramque
partem; that this ability, constituting the very essence of
free will,may be weakened and impeded in its activity,
but never lost entirely. If it were lost, Strigel argued, the
very substance of man and free will as such would have
to be regarded as annihilated. But now man, also after
the Fall, is still a real man, possessed of intellect and will.
Hence original sin cannot have despoiled him of this
liberty of choosing pro or con also in matters spiritual.
The loss of original righteousness does not according to
Strigel, involve the total spiritual disability of the will
and its sole tendency and activity toward what is spiritually
evil. Moreover, despite original corruption, it is
and remains an indestructible property of man to be
able, at least in a measure, to assent to and to admit, the
operations of the Holy Spirit, and therefore and in this
sense to be converted "aliquo modo volens." (Planck 4,
667. 675. 681.)

It was in opposition to this Semi-Pelagian teaching
that Flacius declared original sin to be not a mere accident,
but the substance of man. Entering upon the train
of thought and the phraseology suggested by his opponent, he called substance what in reality was an accident,
though not an accident such as Strigel contended. From
his own standpoint it was therefore a shrewd move to
hide his own synergism and to entrap his opponent,
when Strigel plied Flacius with the question whether he
denied that original sin was an accident. For in the context
and the sense in which it was proposed the question
involved a vicious dilemma. Answering with yes or no,
Flacius was compelled either to affirm Strigel's synergism
or to expose himself to the charge of Manicheism.
Instead of replying as he did, Flacius should have cleared
the sophistical atmosphere by explaining: "If I say,
'Original sin is an accident,' you [Strigel] will infer what
I reject, viz., that the corrupt will of man retains the
power to decide also in favor of the operations of the
Holy Spirit. And if I answer that original sin is not an
accident (such as you have in mind), you will again infer
what I disavow, viz., that man, who by the Fall has lost
the ability to will in the spiritual direction, has eo ipso
lost the will and its freedom entirely and as such."As it
was, however, Flacius instead of adhering strictly to the
real issue-the question concerning man's cooperation
in conversion-and exposing the sophistry implied in
the question put by Strigel, most unfortunately suffered
himself to be caught on the horns of the dilemma. He
blindly walked into the trap set for him by Strigel, from
which also later on he never succeeded in fully extricating
himself.

With all his soul Flacius rejected the synergism
involved in Strigel's question.His blunder was, as stated,
that he did so in terms universally regarded as
Manichean. He was right when he maintained that
original sin is the inherited tendency and motion of the
human mind, will, and heart, not toward, but against
God,-a direction, too, which man is utterly unable to
change. But he erred fatally by identifying this inborn
evil tendency with the substance of fallen man and the
essence of his will as such. It will always be regarded as a
redeeming feature that it was in antagonizing synergism
and championing the Lutheran sola gratia that Flacius
coined his unhappy proposition. And in properly estimating
his error, it must not be overlooked that he, as
will be shown in the following employed the terms
"substance"and "accident" not in their generally accepted
meaning but in a sense, and according to a philosophical
terminology, of his own.

#### 169. Formal and Material Substance.

The terms "substance"and "accident" are defined in
Melanchthon's Erotemata Dialectices as follows:
"Substantia est ens, quod revera proprium esse habet, nec
est in alio, ut habens esse a subiecto. Substance is something
which in reality has a being of its own and is not
in another as having its being from the subject." (C. R.
13, 528.) "Accidens est quod non per sese subsistit, nec est
pars substantiae, sed in alio est mutabiliter. Accident is
something which does not exist as such nor is a part of
the substance, but is changeable in something else."
(522.) Melanchthon continues: "Accidentium alia sunt
separabilia ut frigus ab aqua, notitia a mente, laetitia,
tristitia a corde. Alia accidentia sunt inseparabilia, ut
quantitas seu magnitudo a substantia corporea, calor ab
igni, humiditas ab aqua, non separantur ... Et quia separabilia
accidentia magis conspicua sunt, ideo inde sumpta
est puerilis descriptio: Accidens est, quod adest et abest
praeter subiecti corruptionem. Whatever is present or
absent without the corruption of the subject is an accident."
(C. R. 13, 523; Preger 2, 396. 407; Seeberg 4, 494.)

Evidently this last definition, which was employed
also by Strigel, is ambiguous, inasmuch as the word
"corruption" may signify an annihilation, or merely a
perversion, or a corruption in the ordinary meaning of
the word. In the latter sense the term applied to original
sin would be tantamount to a denial of the Lutheran
doctrine of total corruption. When Jacob Andreae, in
his disputation with Flacius, 1571, at Strassburg,
declared that accident is something which is present or
absent without corruption of the subject, he employed
the term in the sense of destruction or annihilation. In
the same year Hesshusius stated that by original sin "the
whole nature body and soul, substance as well as accidents,
are defiled, corrupted, and dead," of course, spiritually.
And what he understood by substance appears
from his assertion: "The being itself, the substance and
nature itself, in as far as it is nature, is not an evil conflicting
with the Law of God ...Not even in the devil the
substance itself, in as far as it is substance, is a bad thing,
i.e., a thing conflicting with the Law." (Preger 2, 397.)

The _Formula of Concord_ carefully and correctly
defines: "Everything that is must be either substantia,
that is, a self-existent essence, or accidens, that is, an
accidental matter, which does not exist by itself essentially
but is in another self-existent essence and can be
distinguished from it." "Now, then, since it is the indisputable
truth that everything that is, is either a substance
or an accidens that is, either a self-existing essence
or something accidental in it (as has just been shown
and proved by testimonies of the church-teachers, and
no truly intelligent man has ever had any doubts concerning
this), necessity here constrains, and no one can
evade it if the question be asked whether original sin is
a substance, that is, such a thing as exists by itself, and is
not in another, or whether it is an accidens, that is, such
a thing as does not exist by itself, but is in another, and
cannot exist or be by itself, he must confess straight and
pat that original sin is no substance, but an accident."
(877, 54; 57.)

Flacius, however, took the words "substance" and
"accident" in a different sense. He distinguished
between the material and formal substance, and the latter
he regarded as man's true original essence. This
essence he explained, consisted in the original righteousness
and holiness of man, in the image of God or
the will as truly free and in proper relation toward God.
He said:"Ipsum hominem essentialiter sic esse formatum,
ut recta voluntas esset imago Dei, non tantum eius accidens."
(Seeberg 4, 494.) He drew the conclusion that
original sin, by which the image of God (not the human
understanding and will as such) is lost, cannot be a
mere accident, but constitutes the very essence and substance
of fallen man. He argued: The image of God is
the formal essence of man,or the soul itself according to
its best part,by original sin this image is changed into its
opposite: hence the change wrought by original sin is
not accidental, but substantial,-just as substantial and
essential as when wine is changed into vinegar or fire
into frost.What man has lost, said Flacius, is not indeed
his material substance (substantia rnaterialis), but his
true formal substance or substantial form (substantia
formalis or forma substantialis).Hence also original sin,
or the corruption resulting from the Fall, in reality is,
and must be designated, the formal substance or substantial
form of natural man. Not all gifts of creation
were lost to man by his Fall; the most essential boon,
however, the image of God, was destroyed and changed
into the image of Satan. "In homine," said Flacius, "et
mansit aliquid, et tamen quod optimum in ratione et
essentia fuit, nempe imago Dei, non tantum evanuit, sed
etiam in contrarium, nempe in imaginem diaboli, commutatum
est." The devil, Flacius continued, has robbed
man of his original form (forma), the image of God,
and stamped him with his own diabolical form and
nature. (Luthardt 215; Gieseler 3, 2, 253.)

#### 170. Further Explanations of Flacius.

The manner in which Flacius distinguished
between material and formal substance appears from
the tract on original sin (De Peccati Originalis aut Veteris
Adami Appellationibus et Essentia), which he appended
to his Clavis Scripturae of 1567. There we read: "In this
disputation concerning the corruption of man I do not
deny that this meaner matter (illam viliorem materiam)
or mass of man created in the beginning has indeed
remained until now, although it is exceedingly vitiated,
as when in wine or aromas the spirituous (airy) or fiery
substance escapes, and nothing remains but the earthy
and watery substance but I hold that the substantial
form or the formal substance (formam substantialem
aut substantiam formalem) has been lost, yea, changed
into its opposite.But I do not speak of that external and
coarse form (although it too, is corrupted and weakened
very much) which a girl admires in a youth, or
philosophy also in the entire man, according to which
he consists of body and soul, has an erect stature two
feet, hands, eyes, ears, and the like, is an animal laughing,
counting, reasoning, etc.; but I speak of that most
noble substantial form (nobilissima substantialis forma)
according to which especially the heart itself or rather
the rational soul, was formed in such a manner that his
very essence might be the image of God and represent
Him, and that his substantial powers, intellect and will,
and his affections might be conformed to the properties
of God, represent, truly acknowledge, and most willingly
embrace Him." (Preger 2, 314; Gieseler 3, 2, 254.)

Again: "In this manner, therefore, I believe and
assert that original sin is a substance, because the rational
soul (as united with God) and especially its noblest
substantial powers, namely, the intellect and will which
before had been formed so gloriously that they were the
true image of God and the fountain of all justice,
uprightness, and piety, and altogether essentially like
unto gold and gems, are now, by deceit of Satan, so
utterly perverted that they are the true and living image
of Satan, and, as it were, filthy or rather consisting of an
infernal flame, not otherwise than when the sweetest
and purest mass, infected with the most venomous ferment,
is altogether and substantially changed and transformed
into a lump of the same ferment." (Gieseler 3, 2,
254.) Original sin "is not a mere accident in man, but his
inverted and transformed essence or new form itself,
just as when a most wholesome medicine is changed
into the most baneful poison.""The matter remains, but
it receives a new form, namely, the image of Satan."
"Man, who in his essential form was the image of God,
has in his essential form become the image of Satan."
"This change may be compared to the change which the
golden image of a beautiful man undergoes when it is
transformed into the image of a dragon, the matter at
the same time being corrupted." (Preger 2, 214. 217.
325.)

Dilating on the substantiality of original sin, Flacius
furthermore declared: "Original malice in man is not
something different from the evil mind or stony heart
itself, not something that destroys him spiritually as a
disease consumes him bodily, but it is ruined and
destroyed nature itself (sed est tantum ipsa perditissima
et iam destructissima natura). Original malice was not,
as many now think infused from without into Adam in
such a way as when poison or some other bad substance
is thrown or poured into good liquor, so that by reason
of the added bad substance also the rest becomes noxious,
but in such a way as when good liquor or bread
itself is perverted so that now it is bad as such and poisonous
or rather poison (ut illud per se iam malum ac
venenatum aut potius venenum sit)." (Preger 2, 313.)

Also concerning the body and soul of fallen man
Flacius does not hesitate to affirm that, since they are
permeated and corrupted by original sin, "these parts
themselves are sin eas ipsas [partes, corpus et animam]
esse illud nativum malum, quod cum Deo pugnat."
"Some object," says Flacius, "that the creature of God
must be distinguished from sin, which is not of God. I
answer: now do separate, if you can, the devil from his
inherent wickedness! ...How can the same thing be separated
from itself! We therefore can not distinguish
them in any other way than by stating that with respect
to his first creation and also his present preservation
man, even as the devil himself, is of God, but that with
respect to this horrible transformation (ratione istius
horrendae metamorphoseos) he is of the devil, who, by
the force of the efficacious sentence and punishment of
angry God: ¡¥Thou shalt die,' not only captured us to be
his vilest slaves, but also recast, rebaked, and changed,
or, so to speak,metamorphosed us into another man, as
the Scripture says, even as he [the devil] himself is
inverted." All parts, talents, and abilities of man, Flacius
contends, are "evil and mere sins," because they all
oppose God. "What else are they than armed unrighteousness!"
he exclaims. Even the natural knowledge of
God "is nothing but the abominable source of idolatry
and of all superstitions." (Preger 316f.; Gieseler 3, 2,
255.)

That the fundamental view of Flacius,however, was
much farther apart from Manicheism than some of his
radical phrases imply, appears from his "Gnw'qi seautovn,
De Essentia Originalis Institutiae," of 1568. After
admitting that Augustine, Luther, and the Apology of the
Augsburg Confession are correct when they define original
sin as an inordinate disposition, a disorder (ajtaxiva),
perversion, and confusion of the parts of man,
Flacius proceeds: "The substantial form of a certain
thing for the most part, consists in the right position
and disposition of the parts; as, for example, if a human
body were born which had its eyes, ears, and mouth on
the belly or feet, and, vice versa, the toes on the head, no
one would say that it was properly a man, but rather a
monster ... It appears, therefore, that the inordinate disposition
of the parts produces an altogether new body
or thing. Thus, forsooth, the horrible perturbation of
the soul has also produced, as it were a new kind of
monster fighting against God." (Preger 2, 409.)
Accordingly, it was not man's body and soul as such, but
the alteration of the relation of his powers toward one
another and the consequent corruption of these powers,
that Flacius had in mind when he designated original
sin as the new substantial form, or substance, of sinful
man.

Flacius expressly denied that the fall of man or his
conversion involved a physical change."I do not teach a
physical regeneration," he declared, "nor do I say that
two hearts are created, but I say that this most excellent
part of the soul or of man is once more established, or
that the image of God is recast and transformed out of
the image of Satan, even as before the image of God was
transformed into the image of Satan. Physicam
renascentiam non assero nec dico duo corda creari, sed
dico istam praestantissimam animae aut hominis partem
denuo condi aut ex imagine Satanae refundi aut transformari
imaginem Dei, sicut antea imago Dei fuit transformata
in imaginem Satanae." (Seeberg 4, 495.) Gieseler
pertinently remarks: "It is apparent that Flacius did not
deviate from the common concept of original sin, but
from the concepts of substance and accident, but that
here, too, he was uncertain, inasmuch as he employed
the terms substantia, forma substantialis, and substantia
formalis promiscuously." (3, 2, 255.)

If not necessarily involved in, it was at least in keeping
with his extreme position and extravagant phraseology
concerning original sin when Flacius, in his De
Primo et Secundo Capite ad Romanos, quatenus Libero
Arbitrio Patrocinari Videntur, rejected the doctrine of an
inborn idea of God and of His Law inscribed in the
heart of natural man. On Rom. 1, 19 he comments: It is
only from the effects in the world that man infers the
existence of a supreme cause.And with respect to Rom.
2, 15 he maintains that Paul's statements were to be
understood, not of a law written in the heart of man,
but of a knowledge which the heathen had derived by
inference, from experience, or from tradition of the
fathers. On this point Strigel, no doubt was correct
when he objected: If the knowledge of God's existence
were really extinguished from the heart, there could be
no discipline among men; and if man had no inborn
knowledge of the Law, then there could be no such
thing as conscience which condemns him when he sins.
The fact that man fears punishments even when there is
no government to fear, as was the case with Alexander
when he had murdered Clitus, proves that in the heart
there is a certain knowledge both of God and of His
Law. (Preger 2, 213.) However, Flacius did not, as Strigel
seems to insinuate, deny that natural man has an
obscure knowledge of God's existence and Law, but
merely maintained that this knowledge was not inborn
or inherited, but acquired from without.

#### 171.Controversy Precipitated by Flacius.

Though Flacius, when he first made his statement
concerning the substantiality of original sin may not
have felt absolutely sure of the exact meaning, bearing,
and correctness of his position, yet the facts do not warrant
the assumption that afterwards he was in any way
diffident or wavering in his attitude.Whatever his views
on this subject may have been before 1560-after the
fatal phrase had fallen from his lips, he never flinched
nor flagged in zealously defending it. Nor was he ever
disposed to compromise the matter as far as the substance
of his doctrine was concerned. In 1570
Spangenberg of Mansfeld, who sided with Flacius, suggested
that he retain his meaning, but change his language:
"Teneat Illyricus mentem,mutet linguam."To this
Flacius consented. On September 28 1570, he published
his Brief Confession, in which he agreed to abstain from
the use of the term "substance."However, what he suggested
as a substitute, viz., that original sin be defined as
the nature of man (the word "nature," as he particularly
emphasized, to be taken not in a figurative, but in its
proper meaning), was in reality but another way of
repeating his error.

The same was the case in 1572, when Flacius,
opposed and sorely pressed by the ministerium of
Strassburg (whence he was banished the following
year), offered to substitute for the word "substance" the
phrase "essential powers." (Preger 2, 371.) Two years
later, at the public disputation in Langenau, Silesia,
where Flacius defended his doctrine with favorable
results for himself against Jacob Coler [born 1537; studied
in Frankfort-on-the-Oder, 1564 pastor in Lauban,
Upper Lausatia (Oberlausitz); 1573 in Neukirch; 1574
he opposed Leonard Crentzheim and Flacius; 1575 professor
in Frankfort; afterwards active first as Praepositus
in Berlin and later on as Superintendent in
Mecklenburg, published Disputatio De Libero Arbitrio;
died March 7, {{< hiddenanchor 1612 >}}1612{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, he declared that he did not insist
on his phrase as long as the doctrine itself was adopted
and original sin was not declared to be a mere accident.
But this, too, was no real retraction of his error. (Preger
2, 387.) In a similar way Flacius repeatedly declared
himself willing to abstain from the use of the word
"substance" in connection with his doctrine concerning
original sin, but with conditions and limitations which
made his concessions illusory, and neither did nor could
satisfy his opponents.

At the disputation in Weimar, 1560, Wigand and
Musaeus, as stated, warned Flacius immediately after
the session in which he had made his statement.
Schluesselburg relates: "Immediately during the disputation,
as I frequently heard from their own lips, Dr.
Wigand, Dr. Simon Musaeus, and other colleagues of
his who attended the disputation ... admonished
Illyricus in a brotherly and faithful manner to abstain
from this new, perilous and blasphemous proposition
of the ancient Manicheans, which would cause great
turmoil in the Church of God, and to refute the error of
Victorin [Strigel] concerning free will not by means of a
false proposition, but with the Word of God. However,
intoxicated with ambition, and relying, in the heat of
the conflict, too much on the acumen and sagacity of
his own mind, Illyricus haughtily spurned the brotherly
and faithful admonitions of all his colleagues."
(Catalogus 2, 4.) In his book De Manichaeismo Renovato
Wigand himself reports: "Illyricus answered [to the
admonition of his colleagues to abstain from the
Manichean phrase] that he had been drawn into this
discussion by his opponent against his own will. But
what happened? Contrary to the expectations of his colleagues,
Illyricus in the following session continued, as
he had begun, to defend this insanity." (Preger 2, 324;
Planck 4, 611.) However, it does not appear that after
the disputation his friends pressed the matter any further,
or that they made any efforts publicly to disavow
the Flacian proposition.

In 1567 Flacius published his tract De Peccati
Originalis aut Veteris Adami Appellationibus et Essentia,
"On the Appellations and Essence of Original Sin or the
Old Adam," appending it to his famous Clavis
Scripturae of the same year. He had written this tract
probably even before 1564. In 1566 he sent it to Simon
Musaeus, requesting his opinion and the opinion of
Hesshusius, who at that time was celebrating his marriage
with the daughter of Musaeus. In his answer,
Musaeus approved the tract, but desired that the term
"substance"be explained as meaning not the matter,but
the form of the substance to which Hesshusius also
agreed. After the tract had appeared, Musaeus again
wrote to Flacius, June 21, 1568, saying that he agreed
with his presentation of original sin. At the same time,
however, he expressed the fear that the bold statement
which Flacius had retained,"Sin is substance,"would be
dangerously misinterpreted. (Preger 2, 327.) And before
long a storm was brewing, in which animosity registered
its highest point, and a veritable flood of controversial
literature (one publication following the other in
rapid succession) was poured out upon the Church,
which was already distracted and divided by numerous
and serious theological conflicts.

By the publication of this treatise Flacius who
before long also was harassed and ostracized everywhere,
had himself made a public controversy unavoidable.
In the conflict which it precipitated, he was
opposed by all parties, not only by his old enemies, the
Philippists, but also by his former friends.According to
the maxim: Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis
amica veritas, they now felt constrained, in the interest
of truth, to turn their weapons against their former
comrade and leader. Flacius himself had made it impossible
for his friends to spare him any longer.Nor did he
deceive himself as to the real situation. In a letter written
to Wigand he reveals his fear that the Lutherans and
Philippists, then assembled at the Colloquium in
Altenburg (held from October 21, 1568, to March, 1569,
between the theologians of Thuringia and those of
Electoral Saxony), would unite in a public declaration
against his teaching. Wigand whose warning Flacius
had disregarded at Weimar,wrote to Gallus: Flacius has
forfeited the right to request that nothing be published
against him, because he himself has already spread his
views in print. And before long Wigand began to
denounce publicly the Flacian doctrine as "new and
prolific monsters, monstra nova et fecunda."

#### 172. Publications Pro and Con.

According to Preger the first decided opposition to
the Flacian teaching came from Moerlin and Chemnitz,
in Brunswick, to whom Flacius had also submitted his
tract for approval. Chemnitz closed his criticism by saying:
It is enough if we are able to retain what Luther has
won (parta tueri), let us abandon all desires to go
beyond (ulterius quaerere) and to improve upon him.
(Preger 2, 328.) Moerlin characterized Flacius as a vain
man, and dangerous in many respects. Flacius answered
in an objective manner, betraying no irritation whatever.
(332.) In a letter of August 10, 1568,Hesshusius,who
now had read the tract more carefully charged Flacius
with teaching that Satan was a creator of substance, and
before long refused to treat with him any further. In
September of the same year Flacius published his
Gnw'qi seautovn against the attacks of the Synergists
and Philippists, notably Christopher Lasius [who studied
at Strassburg and Wittenberg, was active in Goerlitz,
Greussen Spandau,Kuestrin,Cottbus, and Senftenberg,
wrote his theory as "a new alchemistic theology."
(Planck 4. 257.)onversione; died {{< hiddenanchor 1572 >}}1572{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. In the same year
Hesshusius prepared his Analysis, which was approved
by Gallus and the Jena theologians.

Realizing that all his former friends had broken
with him entirely, Flacius, in January 1570, published
his Demonstrations Concerning the Essence of the Image
of God and the Devil, in which he attacked his opponents,
but without mentioning their names.His request
for a private discussion was bluntly rejected by the Jena
theologians.Wigand, in his Propositions on Sin of May
5, 1570, was the first publicly to attack Flacius by name.
About the same time Moerlin's Themata de Imagine Dei
and Chemnitz's Resolutio appeared. The former was
directed "against the impious and absurd proposition
that sin is a substance", the latter, against the assertion
"that original sin is the very substance of man, and that
the soul of man itself is original sin." Hesshusius also
published his Letter to M. Flacius Illyricus in the
Controversy whether Original Sin is a Substance. Flacius
answered in his Defense of the Sound Doctrine
Concerning Original Righteousness and Unrighteousness,
or Sin, of September 1, 1570. Hesshusius published his
Analysis, in which he repeated the charge that Flacius
made the devil a creator of substance.

In his Brief Confession, of September 28 1570,
Flacius now offered to abstain from the use of the term
"substance" in the manner indicated above. A colloquium,
however, requested by Flacius and his friends on
the basis of this Confession, was declined by the theologians
of Jena. Moreover, in answer to the Brief
Confession, Hesshusius published (April 21, 1571) his
True Counter-Report, in which he again repeated his
accusation that Flacius made the devil a creator of substance.
He summarized his arguments as follows: "I
have therefore proved from one book [Flacius's tract of
{{< hiddenanchor 1567 >}}1567{{< /hiddenanchor >}} more than six times that Illyricus says: Satan condidit,
fabricavit, transformavit veterem hominem, Satan
est figulus, that is: The devil created and made man, the
devil is man's potter."The idea of a creation out of nothing,
however, was not taught in the statements to which
Hesshusius referred. (Preger 2, 348.) Further publications
by Andrew Schoppe [died after {{< hiddenanchor 1615 >}}1615{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, Wigand,
Moerlin, Hesshusius, and Chemnitz, which destroyed
all hopes of a peaceful settlement, caused Flacius to
write his Orthodox Confession Concerning Original Sin.
In this comprehensive answer, which appeared August
1, 1571, he declares "that either image, the image of God
as well as of Satan, is an essence, and that the opposite
opinion diminishes the merit of Christ." At the same
time he complained that his statements were garbled
and misinterpreted by his opponents, that his was the
position of the man who asked concerning garlic and
received an answer concerning onions, that his opponents
were but disputing with imaginations of their
own. (349f.)

In the same year, 1571,Wigand published a voluminous
book, On Original Sin, in which he charged
Flacius with teaching that original sin is the entire carnal
substance of man according to both his body and
soul. In his description of the Flacian doctrine we read:
"Original sin is a substance, as they teach. Accordingly,
original sin is an animal, and that, too, an intelligent animal.
You must also add ears, eyes, mouth, nose, arms,
belly, and feet. Original sin laughs, talks, sews, sows,
works, reads, writes, preaches, baptizes, administers the
Lord's Supper, etc. For it is the substance of man that
does such things. Behold, where such men end!" Flacius
replied in his Christian and Reliable Answer to All manner
of Sophistries of the Pelagian Accident, 1572, protesting
that the doctrine ascribed to him was a misrepresentation
of his teaching. In the same year Wigand published
Reasons Why This Proposition, in Controversy with
the Manicheans: "Original Sin Is the Corrupt Nature,"
Cannot Stand.Here Wigand truly says: "Evil of the substance
and evil substance are not identical.Malum substantiae
et mala substantia non sunt idem." (Preger 2,
353. 410.)

In several publications of the same year Hesshusius
asserted (quoting testimonies to this effect from
Augustine), that the Flacian doctrine was identical with
the tenets of the Manicheans, in substance as well as
terms. Flacius answered in De Augustini et
Manichaeorum Sententia, in Controversia Peccati, 1572,
in which he declared: "I most solemnly condemn the
Manichean insanity concerning two creators. I have
always denied that original sin is something, or has ever
been something outside of man; I have never ascribed
to this sin any materiality of its own." (355.) This book
was followed by another attack by Hesshusius and an
answer, in turn, by Flacius.

In the same year Hesshusius, in order to prevent
further accessions to Flacianism, published his Antidote
(Antidoton) against the Impious and Blasphemous
Dogma of Matthias Flacius Illyricus by which He Asserts
that Original Sin Is Substance. In this book, which was
republished in 1576 and again in 1579,Hesshusius correctly
argued:"If original sin is the substance of the soul,
then we are compelled to assert one of two things, viz.
either that Satan is the creator of substances or that God
is the creator and preserver of sin. Si substantia animae
est peccatum originis, alterum a duobus necesse est poni,
videlicet, aut Satanam esse conditorem substantiarum,
aut Deum esse peccati creatorem et sustentatorem."
(Gieseler 3, 2, 256.) At this late hour, 1572, Simon
Musaeus, too, entered the arena with his Opinion
Concerning Original Sin, Sententia de Peccato Originali.
In it he taught "that original sin is not a substance, but
the utmost corruption of it, in matter as well as form,"
and that therefore "Pelagianism no less than
Manicheism is to be excluded and condemned."

When the ministerium of Strassburg turned
against Flacius, he again published several books
defending his position on the controverted ques-tions,
which resulted in his expulsion from the city. In 1573
Flacius published an answer to Hesshu-sius's Antidote
entitled, Solid Refutation of the Groundless Sophistries,
Calumnies, and Fig-ments, as also of the Most Corrupt
Errors of the "Antidote" and of Other Neopelagian
Writers. Flacius charged Hesshusius with misrepresentation,
and demanded that he swear whether he really
believed to have found the alleged errors in his writings.
(Preger 2, 364ff.)

Till his death, on March 11, 1575, at Frankfort-onthe-
Main, Flacius consistently adhered to his false terminology
as well as teaching, apparently never for a
moment doubting that he was but defending Luther's
doctrine. One of his last books was entitled, Some Clear
and Splendid Testimonies of Martin Luther Concerning
the Evil Essence, Image, Form, or Shape (Wesen, essentia,
Bild, Form oder Gestalt) of the Earthly Dead Adam and
Concerning the Essential Transformation of Man. (389.)
As stated above, the mistake of Flacius was that he took
literally terms denoting substance which the Bible and
Luther employ in a figurative sense.

#### 173.Adherents of Flacius.

The chief supporters of Flacius were the
Mansfeldians, Count Vollrath and Cyriacus
Spangenberg [born 1528; studied in Wittenberg; served
in Eisleben, then in Mansfeld; died in Strassburg
February 10, {{< hiddenanchor 1604 >}}1604{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. In the serious dissensions which
arose in Mansfeld in consequence of the controversy on
original sin, the Count and Spangenberg were opposed
by the Jena theologians and Superintendent Menzel
[Jerome Menzel, born 1517; studied in Wittenberg;
wrote against Spangenberg; died {{< hiddenanchor 1590 >}}1590{{< /hiddenanchor >}}.As stated above,
it was Spangenberg who endeavored to bring about an
understanding between the contending parties on the
principle: "Teneat Illyricus mentem, mutet linguam." A
colloquy was held 1572 at Castle Mansfeld, in which
Flacius and his adherents were pitted against Menzel,
Rhode, Fabricius, and others.When Fabricius declared
in the discussions:"Only in so far as our nature is not in
conformity with the Law of God is it corrupt," Flacius
exclaimed:"Non quantum, not in as far; but I say it is not
in conformity because it is corrupt, quia corrupta est."
(Preger 2, 375.) Count Vollrath and his adviser, Caspar
Pflug gave Flacius a written testimony that at the colloquy
he had not been convinced, but found to be correct
in the controversy on original sin. The publication of
this testimony by Flacius as also of the minutes of the
Colloquy by Count Vollrath, in 1573, resulted in a number
of further publications by Flacius and his friends as
well as his opponents. At Mansfeld the animosity
against the Flacians did not subside even after the death
of Flacius in 1575. They were punished with excommunication,
incarceration, and the refusal of a Christian
burial. Count Vollrath left 1577, and died at Strassburg
1578. Spangenberg, who also had secretly fled from
Mansfeld, defended the doctrine of Flacius in a tract,De
Peccato Originali, Concerning Original Sin, which he
published 1586 under a pseudonym. He died without
retracting or changing his views. Another adherent of
Flacius was F. Coelestinus, professor at Jena. After his
suspension he left the city and participated in the controversy.
He published Colloquium inter Se et Tilem.
Hesshusium. He died 1572. In August, 1571, Courtpreacher
Christopher Irenaeus and Pastors Guenther
and Reinecker were dismissed in Weimar because of
Flacianism. Irenaeus published Examen Libri
Concordiae and many other books, in which he contends
that original sin is a substance. Pastors Wolf in
Kahla, Schneider in Altendorf, and Franke in Oberrosla
were dismissed in 1572 for the same reason. They, too,
entered the public arena in favor of Flacius. At Lindau
four preachers, who had identified themselves with
Flacius, were also deposed. One of them, Tobias Rupp,
held a public disputation with Andreae. In Antwerp the
elders forbade their ministers to indulge in any public
polemics against Flacius. Among the supporters of
Flacius were also his son,Matthias Flacius, and Caspar
Heldelin. It may be noted here that Saliger (Beatus) and
Fredeland, who were deposed at Luebeck in 1568 also
taught "that original sin is the very substance of the
body and soul of man," and that Christ had assumed
"the flesh of another species" than ours. (Gieseler 3, 2,
257.)

In Regensburg four adherents of Flacius were dismissed
in 1574, among them Joshua Opitz [born 1543;
died {{< hiddenanchor 1585 >}}1585{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. These and others emigrated to the
Archduchy of Austria, where the Lutherans were
numerous and influential, Opitz frequently preaching
to an audience of 7,000.No less than 40 of the Lutheran
ministers of Austria are said to have shared the views of
Flacius. (Preger 2 393.) Only a few of them revealed
symptoms of fanaticism, which resulted in their dismissal.
Among the latter was Joachim Magdeburgius,
then an exile at Efferding.He taught "that the bodies of
believing Christians after their death were still essential
original sin, and that God's wrath remained over them
till the Day of Judgment."(Joecher, Lexicon 3, 32.) At the
same time he branded as errorists Spangenberg, Opitz,
and Irenaeus, who declared their dissent. In 1581 the
Flacians in Austria issued a declaration against the
Formula of Concord, charging its teaching to be inconsistent
with Luther's doctrine on original sin. As late as
1604 there were numerous Flacianists in German
Austria.

#### 174. Decision of Formula of Concord.

Seeberg remarks: "Flacius was not a heretic, but in
the wrangle of his day he was branded as such, and this
has been frequently repeated." (4, 2, 495.) A similar verdict
is passed by Gieseler and other historians. But
whatever may be said in extenuation of his error, it cannot
be disputed that the unfortunate phrases of Flacius
produced, and were bound to produce, most serious
religious offense, as well as theological strife, and hopeless
doctrinal confusion. Even when viewed in the light
of his distinction between formal substance (man as
endowed with the image of God) and material substance
(man as possessed of body and soul, together
with will and intellect), the odiousness of his terminology
is not entirely removed. It was and remained a form
of doctrine and trope or mode of teaching which the
Lutherans were no more minded to tolerate than the
error of Strigel.

Accordingly, the first article of the Formula of
Concord rejects both the synergistic as well as the
Manichean aberrations in the doctrine of original sin.
In its Thorough Declaration we read: "Now this doctrine
[of original sin] must be so maintained and guarded
that it may not deflect either to the Pelagian or the
Manichean side. For this reason the contrary doctrine ...
should also be briefly stated." (865, 16.) Accordingly, in
a series of arguments, the Flacian error is thoroughly
refuted and decidedly rejected. At the same time the
Formula of Concord points out the offensiveness of the
Flacian phraseology. It refers to the controversy regarding
this question as "scandalous and very mischievous,"
and declares:"Therefore it is unchristian and horrible to
hear that original sin is baptized in the name of the Holy
Trinity, sanctified, and saved, and other similar expres-
sions found in the writings of the recent Manicheans,
with which we will not offend simple-minded people."
(873, 45. 59.)

On the other hand, the Formula of Concord is just
as determined in opposing every effort at extenuating
the corruption wrought by original sin. It is solicitous to
explain that in designating original sin as an accident, its
corruption is not minimized in the least, if the answer
concerning the nature of this accident is not derived
from philosophy or human reason, but from the Holy
Scriptures."For the Scriptures," says the Formula,"testify
that original sin is an unspeakable evil and such an
entire corruption of human nature that in it and all its
internal and external powers nothing pure or good
remains, but everything is entirely corrupt, so that on
account of original sin man in God's sight is truly spiritually
dead (plane sit emortuus), with all his powers
dead to that which is good." (879, 60.)

Accordingly, the Formula of Concord rejects the
errors of Strigel and the Semi-Pelagians, "that original
sin is only external, a slight, insignificant spot sprinkled,
or a stain dashed, upon the nature of man ... along with
and beneath which the nature nevertheless possesses
and retains its integrity and power even in spiritual
things. Or that original sin is not a despoliation or deficiency,
but only an external impediment to these spiritual
good powers ... They are rebuked and rejected likewise
who teach that the nature has indeed been greatly
weakened and corrupted through the Fall, but that nevertheless
it has not entirely lost all good with respect to
divine, spiritual things, and that what is sung in our
churches,¡¥Through Adam's fall is all corrupt, nature and
essence human,' is not true, but from natural birth it still
has something good, small, little, and inconsiderable
though it be, namely, capacity, skill, aptness, or ability to
begin, to effect, or to help effect something in spiritual
things." (865, 21ff.)

While the _Formula of Concord_ does not deny the
capacity of fallen man for salvation, it is careful in defining
that this is not an active, but a passive capacity. That
is to say:Man is utterly incapable of qualifying himself
for, or of contributing in the least toward, his own spiritual
restoration; but what is impossible for man is not
impossible with God who, indeed, is able to convert
man, endow him with new spiritual powers, and lead
him to eternal salvation,-a goal for the attainment of
which, in contradistinction from inanimate and other
creatures, man, being a rational creature, endowed with
intellect and will, was created by God and redeemed by
Christ. In the Formula of Concord we read: "And
although God, according to His just, strict sentence, has
utterly cast away the fallen evil spirits forever, He has
nevertheless, out of special, pure mercy,willed that poor
fallen human nature might again become and be capable
and participant of conversion, the grace of God, and
eternal life; not from its own natural, active [or effective]
skill, aptness, or capacity (for the nature of man is obstinate
enmity against God), but from pure grace, through
the gracious efficacious working of the Holy Ghost.And
this Dr. Luther calls capacitatem(non activam, sed passivam),
which he explains thus: Quando patres liberum
arbitrium defendunt, capacitatem libertatis eius praedicant,
quod scilicet verti potest ad bonum per gratiam Dei
et fieri revera liberum, ad quod creatum est. That is:
When the Fathers defend the free will, they are speaking
of this, that it is capable of freedom in this sense, that by
God's grace it can be converted to good, and become
truly free, for which it was created in the beginning."
(889, 20.)

This accords with Luther's words in De Servo
Arbitrio: "It would be correct if we should designate as
the power of free will that [power] by which man, who
is created for life or eternal death, is apt to be moved by
the Spirit and imbued with the grace of God. For we,
too, confess this power, i.e. aptitude or, as the Sophists
[Scholastic theologians] say, disposition and passive
aptitude. And who does not know that trees and animals
are not endowed with it? For, as the saying goes,
heaven is not created for geese. Hanc enim vim, hoc est,
aptitudinem, seu, ut Sophistae loquuntur, dispositivam
qualitatem et passivam aptitudinem, et nos confitemur;
quam non arboribus neque bestiis inditam esse, quis est,
qui nesciat? Neque enim pro anseribus, ut dicitur, coelum
creavit." (E. v. a. 158: St. L. 18. 1720.)

