---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XVI. The Osiandrian and Stancarian Controversies.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 16
---

#### 175. Osiander in Nuernberg and in Koenigsberg.

In the writings of Luther we often find passages
foreboding a future corruption of the doctrine of justification,
concerning which he declared in the Smalcald
Articles: "Of this article nothing can be yielded or surrendered,
even though heaven and earth, and whatever
will not abide, should sink to ruin ...And upon this article
all things depend which we teach and practise in
opposition to the Pope, the devil, and the world.
Therefore we must be sure concerning this doctrine,
and not doubt, for otherwise all is lost, and the Pope and
devil and all things gain the victory and suit over us."
(461, 5.) Martin Chemnitz remarks: "I frequently shud-
der, because Luther-I do not know by what kind of
presentiment-in his commentaries on the Letter to the
Galatians and on the First Book of Moses so often
repeats the statement: ．This doctrine [of justification]
will be obscured again after my death.' " (Walther, Kern
und Stern, 26.)

Andrew Osiander was the first to fulfil Luther's
prophecy. In 1549 he began publicly to propound a
doctrine in which he abandoned the forensic conception
of justification by imputation of the merits of
Christ, and returned to the Roman view of justification
by infusion i.e.,by infusion of the eternal essential righteousness
of the divine nature of Christ.According to his
own statement, he had harbored these views ever since
about 1522.He is said also to have presented them in a
sermon delivered at the convention in Smalcald, 1537.
(Planck 4, 257.) Yet he made no special effort to develop
and publicly to disseminate his ideas during the life
of Luther. After the death of the Reformer, however,
Osiander is reported to have said: "Now that the lion is
dead, I shall easily dispose of the foxes and hares"-i.e.,
Melanchthon and the other Lutheran theologians.
(257.) Osiander was the originator of the controversy
"Concerning the Righteousness of Faith before God,"
which was finally settled in Article III of the Formula of
Concord. Osiander, lauded by modern historians as the
only real "systematizer"among the Lutherans of the first
generation, was a man as proud, overbearing, and passionate
as he was gifted, keen, sagacious, learned, eloquent,
and energetic.He was born December 19, 1498,
at Gunzenhausen, Franconia, and died October 17,
1552, at Koenigsberg, where he was also buried with
high honors in the Old City Church. In 1522 he was
appointed priest at St. Lawrence's Church in the Free
City of Nuernberg.Here he immediately acted the part
of a determined champion of the Reformation.
Subsequently he also participated in some of the most
important transactions of his day.He was present at the
Marburg Colloquy, 1529, where he made the personal
acquaintance of Luther and the Wittenbergers. He also
took part in the discussions at the Diet in Augsburg,
1530; at Smalcald, 1537; at Hagenau and Worms, 1540.
Nor were his interests confined to theological questions.
When, at Nuernberg, 1543, the work of Copernicus, De
Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium, "Concerning the
Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies," was published for
the first time, Osiander read the proof-sheets and wrote
the Preface, in which he designated the new theory as
"hypotheses,"thus facilitating its circulation also among
the Catholics, until in the 17th century the book was
placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum, where it
remained till the 18th century.

When the Augsburg Interim was introduced in
Nuernberg, Osiander resigned, and with words of deep
emotion (in a letter of November 22, 1548, addressed to
the city council) he left the place where he had labored
more than a quarter of a century. January 27 1549, he
arrived in Koenigsberg. Here he was joyously received
by Count Albrecht of Prussia, whom he had gained for
the Reformation in 1523. Moved by gratitude toward
Osiander, whom he honored as his "spiritual father,"
Count Albrecht appointed him pastor of the Old City
Church and, soon after, first professor of theology at the
University of Koenigsberg,with a double salary, though
Osiander had never received an academic degree. The
dissatisfaction which this unusual preferment caused
among his colleagues, Briessman, Hegemon, Isinder,
and Moerlin, soon developed into decided antipathy
against Osiander, especially because of his overbearing,
domineering ways as well as his intriguing methods.No
doubt, this personal element added largely to the animosity
and violence of the controversy that was soon to
follow, and during which the professors in Koenigsberg
are said to have carried firearms into their academic sessions.
(Schaff, Creeds 1, 273.) Yet it cannot be regarded
as the real cause or even as the immediate occasion, of
the conflict, which was really brought about by the
unsound, speculative, and mystical views of Osiander
on the image of God and, particularly, on justification
and the righteousness of faith,-doctrinal points on
which he deviated from the Lutheran teaching to such
an extent that a controversy was unavoidable. Evidently,
his was either a case of relapse into Romanism, or,what
seems to be the more probable alternative, Osiander
never attained to a clear apprehension of the Lutheran
truth nor ever fully freed himself from the Roman doctrine,
especially in its finer and more veiled form of
mysticism.

#### 176. Opposed by Moerlin and Lutherans Generally.

Osiander, as stated, had conceived the fundamental
thoughts of his system long before he reached
Koenigsberg. In 1524, when only twenty-six years of
age, he laid down the outlines of his theory in a publication
entitled: "A Good Instruction (Ein gut Unterricht)
and Faithful Advice from the Holy Divine Scriptures
What Attitude to Take in These Dissensions Concerning
Our Holy Faith and Christian Doctrine, dealing especially
with the questions what is God's Word and what
human doctrine, what Christ and what Antichrist."
Here he says: "Whoever hears, retains, and believes the
Word, receives God Himself, for God is the Word. If,
therefore, the Word of God, Christ, our Lord, dwells in
us by faith and we are one with Him, we may say with
Paul: ．I live, though not I, but Christ lives in me,' and
then we are justified by faith." (Gieseler 3, 2, 270.) In the
following year, 1525, he wrote in his Action of the
Honorable Wise Council in Nuernberg with their
Preachers (Handlung eines ehrsamen weisen Rats zu
Nuernberg mit ihren Praedikanten): "The one and only
righteousness availing before God is God Himself. But
Christ is the Word which we apprehend by faith, and
thus Christ in us, God Himself, is our Righteousness
which avails before God." "The Gospel has two parts;
the first, that Christ has satisfied the justice of God; the
other, that He has cleansed us from sin, and justifies us
by dwelling in us (und uns rechtfertigt, so er in uns
wohnet)." (271.) The embryonic ideas of these early
publications concerning the image of God and justification
were fully developed by Osiander in his book of
1550, Whether the Son of God would hove had to be
Incarnated (An Filius Dei fuerit Incarnandus), if Sin had
Not Entered the World; and especially in his confession
of September, 1551, Concerning the Only Mediator Jesus
Christ (Von dem einigen Mittler Jesu Christo) and
Justification of Faith which appeared also in Latin under
the title De Unico Mediatore, in October of the same
year.

The public conflict began immediately after
Osiander had entered upon his duties at the university.
In his inaugural disputation of April 5, 1549,
"Concerning the Law and Gospel (De Lege et Evangelio),"
Osiander's vanity prompted him at least to hint at his
peculiar views, which he well knew were not in agreement
with the doctrine taught at Wittenberg and in the
Lutheran Church at large. His colleague, Matthias
Lauterwald, a Wittenberg master, who died 1555,
immediately took issue with him. On the day following
the disputation, he published theses in which he
declared: "Osiander denied that faith is a part of repentance."
October 24 of the following year Osiander held
a second disputation ("On Justification, De
Iustificatione") in which he came out clearly against the
doctrine hitherto taught in the Lutheran Church. But
now also a much more able and determined combatant
appeared in the arena, Joachim Moerlin, who henceforth
devoted his entire life to defeat Osiandrism and to
vindicate Luther's forensic view of justification.

Moerlin (Moehrlein) was born at Wittenberg April
6, 1514, he studied under Luther and was made Master
in 1537 and Doctor in 1540; till 1543 he was superintendent
in Arnstadt, Thuringia, and superintendent in
Goettingen till 1549, when he was compelled to leave
because of his opposition to the Augsburg Interim.
Recommended by Elizabeth Duchess of Braunschweig-
Lueneburg, the mother-in-law of Duke Albrecht, he was
appointed preacher at the Dome of Koenigsberg in
1550. Clearly understanding that solid comfort in life
and death is possible only as long as our faith rests solely
on the aliena iustitia,on the objective righteousness of
Christ, which is without us, and is offered in the Gospel
and received by faith; and fully realizing also that
Christian assurance is incompatible with such a doctrine
as Osiander taught, according to which our faith is
to rely on a righteous condition within ourselves,
Moerlin publicly attacked Osiander from his pulpit,and
in every way emphasized the fact that his teaching could
never be tolerated in the Lutheran Church. Osiander
replied in his lectures. The situation thus created was
most intolerable. At the command of the Duke discussions
were held between Moerlin and Osiander, but
without result.

In order to settle the dispute, Duke Albrecht,
accordingly, on October 5, 1551, placed the entire matter
before the evangelical princes and cities with the
request that the points involved be discussed at the various
synods and their verdicts forwarded to
Koenigsberg. This aroused the general interest and the
deepest concern of the entire Lutheran Church in
Germany. Numerous opinions of the various synods
and theologians arrived during the winter of 1551 to
1552.With the exception of the Wuerttemberg Response
(Responsum),written by John Brenz, and the Opinion of
Matthew Vogel, both of whom regarded Osiander's
teaching as differing from the doctrine received by the
Lutheran Church in terms and phrases rather than in
substance, they were unfavorable to Osiander. At the
same time all, including the opinions of Brenz and
Vogel, revealed the fact that the Lutherans, the theologians
of Wittenberg as well as those of Jena,
Brandenburg, Pomerania Hamburg, etc., were firmly
united in maintaining Luther's doctrine, viz., that the
righteousness of faith is not the essential righteousness
of the Son of God, as Osiander held but the obedience
of Christ the God-man imputed by grace to all true
believers as their sole righteousness before God.

Feeling safe under the protection of Duke Albrecht,
and apparently not in the least impressed by the general
opposition which his innovations met with at the
hands of the Lutherans, Osiander continued the controversy
by publishing his Proof (Beweisung) that for
Thirty Years I have Always Taught the Same Doctrine.
And irritated by an opinion of Melanchthon (whom
Osiander denounced as a pestilential heretic), published
with offensive explanations added by the Wittenbergers,
he in the same year (April, 1552) wrote his Refutation
(Widerlegung) of the Unfounded, Unprofitable Answer of
Philip Melanchthon. In this immoderate publication
Osiander boasted that only the Philippian rabble, dancing
according to the piping of Melanchthon, was
opposed to him.

Before long, however, also such opponents of the
Philippists as Flacius, Gallus, Amsdorf, and Wigand
were prominently arraigned against Osiander.
Meanwhile (May 23, 1552) Moerlin published a large
volume entitled: Concerning the Justification of Faith.
Osiander replied in his Schmeckbier of June 24 1552, a
book as keen as it was coarse. In 1552 and 1553 Flacius
issued no less than twelve publications against
Osiander, one of them bearing the title: Zwo fuernehmliche
Gruende Osiandri verlegt, zu einem Schmeckbier,
another: Antidotum auf Osiandri giftiges Schmeckbier.
(Preger 2, 551)

When the controversy had just about reached its
climax, Osiander died, October 17, 1552. Soon after, the
Duke enjoined silence on both parties, and Moerlin was
banished. He accepted a position as superintendent in
Brunswick, where he zealously continued his opposition
to Osiandrism as well as to other corruptions of
genuine Lutheranism. At Koenigsberg the Osiandrists
continued to enjoy the protection and favor of Duke
Albrecht and gradually developed into a quasi-political
party.The leader of the small band was John Funck, the
son-in-law of Osiander and the chaplain of the Duke. In
1566, however, the king of Poland intervened, and
Funck was executed as a disturber of the public peace.
Moerlin was recalled and served as bishop of Samland
at Koenigsberg from 1567 till his death in 1571. The
Corpus Doctrinae Pruthenicum, or Borussicum, framed
by Moerlin and Chemnitz and adopted 1567 at
Koenigsberg, rejected the doctrines of Osiander.
Moerlin also wrote a history of Osiandrism entitled:
Historia, welcher gestalt sich die Osiandrische
Schwaermerei im Lande zu Preussen erhaben.

#### 177.Corruptions Involved in Osiander's Teaching.

Osiander's theory of justification according to
which the righteousness of faith is the eternal, essential
holiness of the divine nature of Christ inhering and
dwelling in man, consistently compelled him to maintain
that justification is not an act by which God
declares a man just, but an act by which He actually
makes him inherently just and righteous; that it is not
an imputation of a righteousness existing outside of
man, but an actual infusion of a righteousness dwelling
in man; that it is not a mere acquittal from sin and guilt,
but regeneration, renewal, sanctification and internal,
physical cleansing from sin that it is not a forensic or
judicial act outside of man or a declaration concerning
man's standing before God and his relation to Him but
a sort of medicinal process within man, that the righteousness
of faith is not the alien (strange, foreign) righteousness,
aliena iustitia (a term employed also by
Luther), consisting in the obedience of Christ, but a
quality, condition, or change effected in believers by the
essential righteousness of the divine nature dwelling in
them through faith in Christ; that faith does not justify
on account of the thing outside of man in which it
trusts and upon which it relies, but by reason of the
thing which it introduces and produces in man; that,
accordingly, justification is never instantaneous and
complete, but gradual and progressive.

Osiander plainly teaches that the righteousness of
faith (our righteousness before God) is not the obedience
rendered by Christ to the divine Law, but the
indwelling righteousness of God (iustitia Dei inhabitans),-
essentially the same original righteousness or
image that inhered in Adam and Eve before the Fall. It
consists, not indeed in good works or in "doing and suffering,"
but in a quality (Art) which renders him who
receives it just, and moves him to do and to suffer what
is right. It is the holiness (Frommigkeit) which consists
in the renewal of man, in the gifts of grace, in the new
spiritual life, in the regenerated nature of man. By His
suffering and death, said Osiander, Christ made satisfaction
and acquired forgiveness for us, but He did not
thereby effect our justification. His obedience as such
does not constitute our righteousness before God, but
merely serves to restore it. It was necessary that God
might be able to dwell in us, and so become our life and
righteousness. Faith justifies, not inasmuch as it apprehends
the merits of Christ, but inasmuch as it unites us
with the divine nature, the infinite essential righteousness
of God,in which our sins are diluted, as it were,and
lost, as an impure drop disappears when poured into an
ocean of liquid purity.

According to the teaching of Osiander therefore,
also the assurance that we are justified and accepted by
God does not rest exclusively on the merits of Christ
and the pardon offered in the Gospel,but must be based
on the righteous quality inhering in us. Our assurance
is conditioned not alone upon what Christ has done
outside of us and for us but rather upon what He is in
us and produces in us. The satisfaction rendered by
Christ many centuries ago is neither the only ground on
which God regards us as just, nor a sufficient basis of
our certainty that we are accepted by God. Not the
Christ for us, but rather the Christ in us, is the basis both
of our justification and assurance.Accordingly in order
to satisfy an alarmed sinner, it is not sufficient to proclaim
the Gospel-promise of divine absolution. In addition,
an investigation is required whether the righteousness
and holiness of God is also really found dwelling in
him. While Luther had urged alarmed consciences to
trust in the merits of Christ alone for their justification
and salvation,Osiander led them to rely on the new life
of divine wisdom, holiness, and righteousness dwelling
in their own hearts. From the very beginning of the
controversy,Moerlin,Melanchthon, and the Lutherans
generally were solicitous to point out that Osiander's
doctrine robs Christians of this glorious and only solid
comfort that it is not a subjective quality in their own
hearts, but solely and only the objective and absolutely
perfect obedience rendered by Christ many hundred
years ago, which God regards when He justifies the
wicked, and upon which man must rely for the assurance
of his acceptance and salvation.

Consistently developed, therefore, the innovation
of Osiander was bound to vitiate in every particular the
doctrine of justification restored once more by Luther.
In fact, his theory was but a revamping of just such
teaching as had driven the Lutherans out of the Church
of Rome. True, Osiander denied that by our own works
we merit justification; that our righteousness consists in
our good works; that our good works are imputed to us
as righteousness. But the fact that he held a subjective
condition to be our righteousness before God gives to
his doctrine an essentially Roman stamp, no matter
how widely it may differ from it in other respects.
Moehler, the renowned Catholic apologist, declared
that properly interpreted and illucidated, Osiander's
doctrine was "identical with the Roman Catholic doctrine."(
Frank 2, 5. 91.) As stated before, his teaching was
Romanism in its finer and more veiled form of mysticism.

#### 178. Excerpts from Osiander's Writings.

In his publication of January 10, 1552 Wider den
lichtfluechtigen Nachtraben, Osiander endeavors to
prove that he is in complete doctrinal agreement with
Luther. In it he gives the following summary, but guarded
presentation of his views."I understand it this way,"
says he."1. It flowed from His pure grace and mercy that
God sacrificed His only Son for us. 2. The Son became
man and was made under the Law, and He has
redeemed us from the Law and from the curse of the
Law. 3. He took upon Himself the sins of the whole
world, for which He suffered, died, shed His blood,
descended into hell, rose again, and thus overcame sin,
death, and hell, and merited for us forgiveness of sin,
reconciliation with God, the grace and gift of justification,
and eternal life. 4. This is to be preached in all the
world. 5.Whoever believes this and is baptized, is justified
and blessed (selig) by virtue of such faith. 6. Faith
apprehends Christ so that He dwells in our hearts
through faith, Eph. 3, 17. 7. Christ, living in us through
faith, is our Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1, 30, Jer. 23, 6; 33, 16. 8. Christ, true
God and man, dwelling in us through faith, is our
Righteousness according to His divine nature, as Dr.
Luther says: ．I rely on the righteousness which is God
Himself; this He cannot reject. Such is, says Luther, the
simple, correct understanding; do not suffer yourself to
be led away from it.'" (Frank 2, 7f.) Seeberg cites the following
passage: "But if the question be asked what is
righteousness, one must answer: Christ dwelling in us
by faith is our Righteousness according to His divinity;
and the forgiveness of sins, which is not Christ Himself,
but merited by Christ, is a preparation and cause that
God offers us His righteousness, which He is Himself."
(Dogg. 4, 498.) Incidentally Osiander's appeal to Luther
is unwarranted. For according to him Christ is our
Righteousness because His obedience is God's obedience,
the work not only ofHis human nature, but, at the
same time, also of His divine nature, while according to
Osiander everything that Christ did for us merely serves
to bring about the indwelling of the divine nature of
Christ, whose essential holiness is our righteousness
before God. That Osiander was not in agreement with
Luther, as he claimed, appears also from his assertion
that such statements of Luther as: Christ's death is our
life, forgiveness of sins is our righteousness, etc.,must be
explained figuratively, as words flowing from a joyous
heart. (2, 23.)

The manner in which Osiander maintained that
Christ is our Righteousness only according to His divine
nature appears from the following excerpts: "If the
question be asked according to what nature Christ,His
whole undivided person, is our Righteousness, then just
as when one asks according to what nature He is the
Creator of heaven and earth, the clear, correct, and plain
answer is that He is our Righteousness according to His
divine, and not according to His human nature,
although we are unable to find, obtain or apprehend
such divine righteousness apart from His humanity."
(Frank 2, 12.) Again: "When we say: Christ is our
Righteousness, we must understand His deity, which
enters us through His humanity.When Christ says: I am
the Bread of Life, we must understand His deity which
comes into us through His humanity and is our life.
When He says:My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood
is drink indeed,we must take it to mean His deity which
is in the flesh and blood and is meat and drink for us.
Thus, too, when John says, 1 John 1, 7: The blood of
Christ cleanseth us from all sin,we must understand the
deity of Christ which is in the blood; for John does not
speak of the blood of Christ as it was shed on the cross,
but as it, united with the flesh of Christ, is our heavenly
meat and drink by faith." (23.) Osiander, therefore, is
but consistent when he reiterates that the Son of God,
the Holy Spirit, and the Father are our Righteousness,
because their divine essence which by faith dwells in
Christians, is one and the same.

Osiander emphasizes that the essential righteousness
of the divine nature of Christ alone is able to save
us.He says: "For of what help would it be to you if you
had all the righteousness which men and angels can
imagine, but lacked this eternal righteousness which is
itself the Son of God, according to His divine nature,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost? For no other righteousness
can lift you up to heaven and bring you to the
Father. But when you apprehend this righteousness
through faith, and Christ is in you, what can you then
be lacking which you do not possess richly, superabundantly,
and infinitely in His deity?"Again: "Since Christ
is ours and is in us, God Himself and all His angels
behold nothing in us but righteousness on account of
the highest, eternal, and infinite righteousness of Christ,
which is His deity itself dwelling in us.And although sin
still remains in, and clings to, our flesh, it is like an
impure little drop compared with a great pure ocean,
and on account of the righteousness of Christ which is
in us God does not want to see it." (Frank 2, 100. 102.)

To this peculiarity of Osiander, according to which
he seems to have had in mind a justification by a sort of
mystico-physical dilution rather than by imputation,
the Formula of Concord refers as follows: "For one side
has contended that the righteousness of faith, which the
apostle calls the righteousness of God, is God's essential
righteousness, which is Christ Himself as the true, natural,
and essential Son of God, who dwells in the elect
by faith and impels them to do right, and thus is their
righteousness, compared with which righteousness the
sins of all men are as a drop of water compared with the
great ocean." (917, 2; 791, 2.)

In his confession Concerning the Only Mediator, of
1551, Osiander expatiates on justification, and defines it
as an act by which righteousness is "infused"into believers.
We read:"It is apparent that whatever part Christ, as
the faithful Mediator, acted with regard to God, His
heavenly Father, for our sakes, by fulfilling the Law and
by His suffering and death, was accomplished more
than 1,500 years ago,when we were not in existence.For
this reason it cannot, properly speaking, have been, nor
be called, our justification, but only our redemption
and the atonement for us and our sins. For whoever
would be justified must believe; but if he is to believe, he
must already be born and live. Therefore Christ has not
justified us who now live and die; but we are redeemed
by it [His work 1,500 years ago] from God's wrath,
death, and hell ... This, however, is true and undoubted
that by the fulfilment of the Law and by His suffering
and death He merited and earned from God,His heavenly
Father, this great and superabounding grace,
namely, that He not only has forgiven our sin and taken
from us the unbearable burden of the Law, but that He
also wishes to justify us by faith in Christ, to infuse justification
or the righteousness (sondern auch uns durch
den Glauben an Christum will rechtfertigen, die
Gerechtmachung eingiessen), and, if only we obey,
through the operation of His Holy Spirit and through
the death of Christ, in which we are embodied by the
baptism of Christ, to mortify, purge out, and entirely
destroy sin which is already forgiven us, but nevertheless
still dwells in our flesh and adheres to us. Therefore the
other part of the office of our dear faithful Lord and
Mediator Jesus Christ is now to turn toward us in order
to deal also with us poor sinners as with the guilty party,
that we acknowledge such great grace and gratefully
receive it by faith, in order that He by faith may make us
alive and just from the death of sin, and that sin, which
is already forgiven, but nevertheless still dwells and
inheres in our flesh, may be altogether mortified and
destroyed in us.And this, first of all, is the act of our justification."
(Tschackert, 492f.; Planck 4, 268.)

That Osiander practically identified justification
with regeneration, renewal, and gradual sanctification
appears from the following quotations. To justify, says
he, means "to make a just man out of an unjust one, that
is to recall a dead man to life-ex impio iustum facere,
hoc est, mortuum ad vitam revocare." (Seeberg 4, 499.)
Again: "Thus the Gospel further shows its power and
also justifies us, i.e., it makes us just, even as, and in the
same degree as,He also makes us alive (eben und in aller
Masse, wie er uns auch lebendig macht)." (Frank 2, 18.)
"And here you see again how terribly those err who
endeavor to prove by this passage of David and Paul
that our righteousness is nothing else than forgiveness
of sin; for they have overlooked the covering of sin with
the [essential] righteousness of Christ whom we put on
in Baptism; they have also removed from justification
the renewal of the inner man effected by regeneration."
(102.)

Osiander was fanatical in denouncing those who
identified justification with the forgiveness of sins. In his
Disputation of October 24, 1550, he declared: "The
entire fulness of the deity dwells in Christ bodily, hence
in those also in whom Christ dwells ... Therefore we are
just by His essential righteousness ...Whoever does not
hold this manner of our justification is certainly a
Zwinglian at heart, no matter what he may confess with
his mouth ...They also teach things colder than ice [who
hold] that we are regarded as righteous only on account
of the forgiveness of sins, and not on account of the
[essential] righteousness of Christ who dwells in us
through faith. Glacie frigidiora docent nos tantum
propter remissionem peccatorum reputari iustos, et non
etiam propter iustitiam Christi per fidem in nobis inhabitantis.
Non enim tam iniquus Deus est, ut eum pro iusto
habeat, in quo verae iustitiae prorsus nil est."(Frank 2, 97;
Tschackert, 494; Seeberg 4 497.) They are errorists,
Osiander declared, "who say, teach, and write that the
righteousness is outside of us." (Frank 2, 100.) "The
[essential] righteousness of Christ is indeed, imputed to
us, but only when it is in us.""For God is not so unrighteous,
nor such a lover of unrighteousness that He
regards him as just in whom there is absolutely nothing
of the true righteousness; as it is written, Ps. 5, 4: ．For
Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness;
neither shall evil dwell with Thee,' " (Planck 4, 273.)
Evidently, Osiander rejected or had never fully grasped
Paul's clear statement and teaching concerning the God
who justifies the ungodly, Rom. 4, 5: "But to him that
worketh not, but believeth on Him that justifieth the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness."

#### 179.Attitude of Brenz and Melanchthon.

With the exception of Brenz and Vogel, who, as
stated before, regarded Osiander's doctrine as differing
from the generally received view in phraseology and
mode of presentation rather than in substance, the
Lutherans everywhere were unanimous in rejecting
Osiander's theory as a recrudescence of the Romish justification
not by imputation, but by infusion.And as to
Brenz, who put a milder construction on the statements
of Osiander, Melanchthon wrote October 1, 1557:
"Concerning the affair with Osiander, my writings are
publicly known,which I hope will be of benefit to many.
Brenz also is agreed with us doctrinally.He said he had
advised peace, for he did not take Osiander's expressions
to be as dangerous as the opponents did, and for
this reason could not as yet condemn his person; but in
doctrine he was agreed with us and would unite in condemning
Osiander if the charges made against him
were proved." Melanchthon himself fully realized the
viciousness of Osiander's error, although at the colloquy
in Worms, 1557, he, too, was opposed to condemning
Osiandrism together with Zwinglianism, Majorism,
and Adiaphorism, as the theologians of Ducal Saxony
demanded. (C. R. 9, 311. 402.)

In May, 1551, Melanchthon wrote to Osiander that
by the essential righteousness of Christ renewal is effected
in us, but that we have forgiveness of sins and are
reputed to be righteous on account of the merit of
Christ whose blood and death appeased the wrath of
God. In his confutation of the Osiandric doctrine,written
in September, 1555, we read: "Osiander's definition
of righteousness is: Righteousness is that which makes
us do what is righteous ... Hence man is righteous by
doing what is righteous ... Thereupon Osiander, in
order to say something also concerning forgiveness of
sins, tears remission of sins from righteousness. He
expressly declares that the sins are forgiven to all men;
Nero however, is damned because he does not possess
the essential righteousness; and this, he says, is God
Himself, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit ... Osiander
contends that man is just on account of the indwelling
of God, or on account of the indwelling God, not on
account of the obedience of the Mediator, not by the
imputed righteousness of the Mediator through grace.
And he corrupts the proposition, ．By faith we are justified,'
into, By faith we are prepared that we may become
just by something else, viz., the inhabiting God.Thus he
in reality says what the Papists say: ．We are righteous by
our renewal,' except that he mentions the cause where
the Papists mention the effect. Ita re ipsa dicit, quod
Papistae dicunt, sumus iusti novitate, nisi quod nominat
causam, ubi nominant Papistae effectum. We are just
when God renews us. He therefore detracts from the
honor due to the Mediator, obscures the greatness of
sin, destroys the chief consolation of the pious, and
leads them into perpetual doubt. For faith cannot exist
unless it looks upon the promise of mercy concerning
the Mediator. Nor is there an inhabitation unless the
consolation is received by this faith. And it is a preposterous
way of teaching that one is to believe first the
inhabitation, afterwards forgiveness of sins (prius
credere inhabitationem, postea remissionem peccatorum).
Since therefore this dogma of Osiander is both false and
pernicious to consciences, it must be shunned and
damned." (C. R. 7, 781; 8, 579ff.)

In another essay, of September, 1556, signed also by
Melanchthon, the following propositions are rejected: 1.
Man becomes righteous on account of the essential
righteousness. 2.Man becomes righteous on account of
the essential righteousness of God the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit. 3. Man becomes righteous before God on
account of the indwelling of God. 4. Righteousness consists
in the indwelling of Christ, on account of which
God imputes righteousness to us ... 5.Nor must one say
there are two or more parts of justification: faith, inhabitation,
good works, etc. For justification before God is
to receive forgiveness of sins and to become acceptable
to God on account of Christ ... 6. This proposition, too,
is false: The regenerate after the Fall are righteous in the
same manner as Adam was before the Fall, namely, not
by imputation, but by inhabitation or original righteousness
... 8. It is also false when some say we are righteous
by faith, namely, in a preparative way in order
afterwards to be righteous by the essential righteousness.
At bottom this is Popish and destructive of faith ...
9. The following propositions must be rejected altogether:
The obedience of Christ is called righteousness
in a tropical sense; Christ justifies accidentally (per accidens).
(C. R. 8, 561f.; 9, 3l9. 451. 455. 457.)

#### 180. Osiander's Views on Image of God.

Osiander's corruption of the doctrine of justification
was closely connected with his peculiar view concerning
the image of God (the central idea of his entire
system), of which, however, he declared that he did not
consider it essential, and would not contend with anybody
about it. Nor were the questions involved disputed
to any extent or dealt with in the Formula of Concord.
As to Osiander, however, the train of his thoughts runs
as follows:-

The Logos, the divine Word, is the image of God, into
whom His entire essence flows in a manner and process
eternal. In a temporal and historical way the same image
is destined to be realized in the nature of man. Divine
essential righteousness indwelling and efficacious in
humanity-such was the eternal plan of God. For the
realization of this purpose the Logos, God's image, was to
become man, even if the human race should not have
fallen. This was necessary because in finite man there is
absolutely no similarity with the infinite essence of the
non-incarnate Logos. Without the incarnation, therefore,
this infinite dissimilarity would have remained forever
(esset et maneret simpliciter infinita dissimilitudo
inter hominem et Verbum Dei). And in order that man
might be capable of God and share His divine nature
(capax Dei et divinae naturae consors), God created him
according to His image; i.e., according to the idea of the
incarnate Logos. "God formed the body of man," said
Osiander, "that it should be altogether like unto the
future body of Christ. Thereupon He breathed into it
the breath of life, i.e., a rational soul together with the
human spirit, adorned with the proper powers, in such
a manner that it, too, should be like unto the future soul
of Christ in everything." (Frank 2, 104.)

In the incarnate Logos, however, according to whom
man was created, humanity and divinity are personally
united. When the Word was made flesh, the divine
essence was imparted to His human nature.And Christ,
in turn, imparts the same essence to all who by faith are
one with Him. From eternity the incarnate Word was
destined to be the head of the congregation in order that
the essential righteousness of God might flow from
Him into His body, the believers.Before the Fall the Son
of God dwelled in Adam, making him just by God's
essential righteousness. By the Fall this righteousness
was lost. Hence the redemption and atonement of
Christ were required in order again to pave the way for
the renewal of the lost image or the indwelling of God's
essential righteousness in man. The real source of this
righteousness and divine life in man, however, is not the
human, but the divine nature of Christ. In the process
of justification or of making man righteous, the human
nature of Christ merely serves as a medium, or as it
were, a canal, through which the eternal essential wisdom,
holiness, and righteousness of Christ's divine
nature flows into our hearts.

Christ, the "inner Word" (John 1), says Osiander,
approaches man in the "external Word"(the words spoken
by Jesus and His apostles), and through it enters the
believing soul. For through Word, Sacrament, and faith
we are united with His humanity. In the Lord's Supper,
for instance, we become the flesh and blood of Christ,
just as we draw the nourishment out of natural food
and transform it into our flesh and blood.And since the
humanity of Christ, with which we become one in the
manner described, is personally united with the deity, it
imparts to us also the divine essence, and, as a result,we,
too, are the abode of the essential righteousness of God.
"We cannot receive the divine nature from Christ," says
Osiander, "if we are not embodied in Him by faith and
Baptism, thus becoming flesh and blood and bone of
His flesh, blood, and bone." As the branches could not
partake of the nature of the vine if they were not of the
wood of the vine, even so we could not share the divine
nature of Christ if we had not, incorporated in Him by
faith and Baptism, become flesh, blood, and bone ofHis
flesh, blood, and bone.Accordingly, as Christ's humanity
became righteous through the union with God, the
essential righteousness which moved Him to obedience
toward God, thus we also become righteous through
our union with Christ and in Him with God. (Frank 2,
104. 20ff.; Seeberg 4, 497f.)

In view of such speculative teaching, in which justification
is transformed into a sort of mystico-physical
process, it is not surprising that the charge of pantheism
was also raised against Osiander. The theologians of
Brandenburg asserted that he inferred from his doctrine
that the believers in Christ are also divine persons,
because the Father, Son and Holy Ghost dwell in them
essentially. But Osiander protested: "Creatures we are
and creatures we remain, no matter how wonderfully
we are renewed; but the seed of God and the entire
divine essence which is in us by grace in the same manner
as it is in Christ by nature and remains eternally in
us (das also aus Gnaden in uns ist wie in Christo von
Natur und bleibt ewiglich in uns) is God Himself, and no
creature, and will not become a creature in us or on
account of us but will eternally remain in us true God."
Frank says concerning the doctrine of Osiander: It is not
pantheism or a mixture of the divine and human
nature, "but it is a subjectivism by which the objective
foundation of salvation as taught by the Lutheran
Church is rent to the very bottom. It is a mysticism
which transforms the Christ for us into the Christ in us,
and, though unintentionally, makes the consciousness
of the inhabitatio essentialis iustitiae (indwelling of the
essential righteousness) the basis of peace with God."(2,
19. 10. 13. 95. 103.) In his teaching concerning the
image of God and justification, Osiander replaced the
comforting doctrine of the Bible concerning the substitutionary
and atoning work of Christ in His active and
passive obedience unto death with vain philosophical
speculations concerning divinity and humanity or the
two natures of Christ. It was not so very far beside the
mark, therefore, when Justus Menius characte3_______________________________________
..._______________________

#### 181. Error of Stancarus.

The Stancarian dispute was incidental to the
Osiandric conflict. Its author was Francesco Stancaro
(born in Mantua, 1501), an Italian ex-priest, who had
emigrated from Italy on account of his Protestant views.
Vain, opinionated, haughty, stubborn, and insolent as
he was, he roamed about, creating trouble wherever he
appeared, first in Cracow as professor of Hebrew, 1551
in Koenigsberg then in Frankfort-on-the-Oder, next at
various places in Poland, Hungary, and Transylvania.
He died at Stobnitz, Poland, November 12, 1574.
Stancarus treated all of his opponents as ignoramuses
and spoke contemptuously of Luther and
Melanchthon, branding the latter as an antichrist. In
Koenigsberg he immediately felt called upon to interfere
in the controversy which had just flared up.He opposed
Osiander in a fanatical manner, declaring him to be the
personal antichrist. The opponents of Osiander at
Koenigsberg however, were not elated over his comradeship,
particularly because he fell into an opposite
error. They were glad when he resigned and left for
Frankfort the same year he had arrived at Koenigsberg.
In Frankfort, Stancarus continued the controversy, publishing,
1552, his Apology against Osiander-Apologia
contra Osiandrum. But he was ignored rather than
opposed by the Lutheran theologians. In 1553
Melanchthon wrote his Answer (Responsio) Concerning
Stancar's Controversy. Later on, 1561, when Stancarus
was spreading his errors in Poland, Hungary, and
Transylvania, Calvin and the ministers of Zurich also
wrote against him. The chief publication in which
Stancarus set forth and defended his views appeared
1562, at Cracow, under the title: Concerning the Trinity
(De Trinitate) and the Mediator, Our Lord Jesus Christ.
As late as 1585 Wigand published his book Concerning
Stancarism-De Stancarismo.

Stancarus had been trained in scholastic theology
and was a great admirer of Peter Lombard. In his book
De Trinitate et Mediatore he says: "One Peter Lombard
is worth more than a hundred Luthers, two hundred
Melanchthons, three hundred Bullingers, four hundred
Peter Martyrs, five hundred Calvins out of whom, if
they were all brayed in a mortar, not one drop of true
theology would be squeezed. Plus valet unus Petrus
Lombardus quam centum Lutheri, ducenti
Melanchthones, trecenti Bullingeri, quadringenti Petri
Martyres et quingenti Calvini, qui omnes, si in mortario
contunderentur, non exprimeretur una mica verae theologiae."
(J.G.Walch, Religionsstreitigkeiten 4, 177.)

Concerning Christ's obedience Peter Lombard
taught: "Christus Mediator dicitur secundum humanitatem,
non secundum divinitatem...Mediator est ergo, in
quantum homo, et non in quantum Deus.Christ is called
Mediator according to His humanity, not according to
His divinity ...He is therefore Mediator inasmuch as He
is man, and not inasmuch as He is God." (Planck 4, 451;
Seeberg 4, 507.) In accordance with this teaching,
Stancarus maintained, in pointed opposition to
Osiander, that Christ is our Righteousness only
according to His human nature, and not according to
His divine nature. The divine nature of Christ,
Stancarus declared must be excluded from the office of
Christ's mediation and priesthood; for if God the Son
were Mediator and would do something which the
Father and the Holy Spirit could not do, then He would
have a will and an operation and hence also a nature
and essence different from that of the Father and the
Holy Spirit. He wrote: "Christ, God and man, is
Mediator [and Redeemer] only according to the other
nature, namely, the human, not according to the divine;
Christ made satisfaction for us according to His human
nature, but not according to His divine nature; according
to His divine nature Christ was not under the Law,
was not obedient unto death, etc." (Frank 2, 111.)
Stancarus argued: "Christ is one God with the Father
and the Holy Spirit. Apart from the three personal
properties of ．paternitas, filiatio, and spiratio passiva' the
three divine persons are absolutely identical in their
being and operation. Their work is the sending of the
Mediator, whose divine nature itself, in an active way,
participates in this sending; hence only the human
nature of the God-man is sent, and only the human
nature of the Mediator acts in a reconciling way. Men
are reconciled by Christ's death on the cross; but the
blood shed on the cross and death are peculiar to the
human nature, not to the divine nature; hence we are
reconciled by the human nature of Christ only, and not
by His divine nature (ergo per naturam humanam
Christi tantum sumus reconciliati et non per divinam)."
(Schluesselburg 9, 216ff.)

Consistently, the Stancarian doctrine destroys both
the unity of the person of Christ and the sufficiency of
His atonement. It not only corrupts the doctrine of the
infinite and truly redeeming value of the obedience of
the God-man, but also denies the personal union of the
divine and human natures in Christ. For if the divine
nature is excluded from the work of Christ, then it must
be excluded also from His person, since works are
always acts of a person. And if it was a mere human
nature that died for us, then the price of our redemption
is altogether inadequate, and we are not redeemed,
as Luther so earnestly emphasized against Zwingli.
(CONC. TRIGL. 1029, 44.) True, Stancarus protested:
"Christ is Mediator according to the human nature
only; this exclusive ．only' does not exclude the divine
nature from the person of Christ, but from His office as
Mediator." (Frank 2, 111.) However, just this was
Luther's contention, that Christ is our Mediator also
according to His divine nature, and that the denial of
this truth both invalidates His satisfaction and divides
His person.

The Third Article of the Formula of Concord, therefore,
rejects the error of Stancarus as well as that of
Osiander. Against the latter it maintains that the active
and passive obedience of Christ is our righteousness
before God: and over against the former, that this obedience
was the act of the entire person of Christ, and not
of His human nature alone.We read: "In opposition to
both these parties [Osiander and Stancarus] it has been
unanimously taught by the other teachers of the
Augsburg Confession that Christ is our Righteousness
not according to His divine nature alone, nor according
to His human nature alone, but according to both
natures; for He has redeemed, justified, and saved us
from our sins as God and man, through His complete
obedience; that therefore the righteousness of faith is
the forgiveness of sins, reconciliation with God, and our
adoption as God's children only on account of the obedience
of Christ, which through faith alone, out of pure
grace is imputed for righteousness to all true believers,
and on account of it they are absolved from all their
unrighteousness." (917, 4.)

#### 182. Deviations of Parsimonious and Hamburg Ministers.

In 1563 a collateral controversy concerning the
obedience of Christ was raised by Parsimonius (George
Karg). He was born 1512; studied under Luther in
Wittenberg; 1547 he became pastor in Schwabach, and
1556 superintendent in Ansbach; 1563 he was deposed
because of erroneous theses published in that year; he
was opposed by Hesshusius and Ketzmann in Ansbach;
1570, having discussed his difference with the theologians
in Wittenberg, Karg retracted and was restored to
his office; he died 1576. In his theses on justification
Parsimonius deviated from the Lutheran doctrine by
teaching that Christ redeemed us by His passive obedience
only, and by denying that His active obedience had
any vicarious merit, since as man He Himself owed
such obedience to the Law of God,-a view afterwards
defended also by such Reformed divines as John
Piscator John Camero, and perhaps Ursinus. (Schaff I,
274.)

Over against this error the Formula of Concord
explains and declares: "Therefore the righteousness
which is imputed to faith or to the believer out of pure
grace is the obedience suffering, and resurrection of
Christ, since He has made satisfaction for us to the Law,
and paid for our sins. For since Christ is not man alone,
but God and man in one undivided person, He was as
little subject to the Law (because He is the Lord of the
Law) as He had to suffer and die as far as His person is
concerned. For this reason, then, His obedience, not
only in suffering and dying, but also in this, that He in
our stead was voluntarily made under the Law and fulfilled
it by this obedience, is imputed to us for righteousness,
so that, on account of this complete obedience
which He rendered His heavenly Father for us, by
doing and suffering, in living and dying, God forgives
our sins, regards us as godly and righteous, and eternally
saves us." (919, 16.)-

In their zealous opposition to the doctrine of
Osiander according to which the indwelling essential
holiness of the divine nature of Christ is our righteousness
before God, also the Hamburg ministers went a
step too far in the opposite direction.They denied, or at
any rate seemed to deny, the indwelling of the Holy
Trinity as such in believers. In their Response (Responsio)
of 1552 they declared: "God is said to dwell where He is
present by His grace and benevolence, where He gives
the Word of His grace, and reveals His promises concerning
His mercy and the remission of sins, where He
works by His Spirit, etc." (Frank 2, 107.) Again: "That
His indwelling pertains to His efficacy and operation
appears from many passages which describe without a
figure the efficacy and operation of Christ and of the
Holy Spirit dwelling in believers." "The dwelling of the
Holy Spirit in believers signifies that they are led by the
Spirit of God.""But it cannot be proved by the Scripture
that the fulness of God dwells bodily in us as it dwells in
Christ Jesus. The inhabitation of God in us is a matter
of grace, not of nature; of gift, not of property." (107.)

In 1551 Melanchthon had written: "It must be
admitted that God dwells in our hearts, not only in such
a manner that He there is efficacious, though not present
with His own essence, but that He is both present
and efficacious. A personal union, however, does not
take place in us, but God is present in us in a separable
manner as in a separable domicile." (C. R. 7, 781.) This
was the view of the Lutheran theologians generally.
Article III of the Formula of Concord, too, is emphatic in
disavowing a personal union of the deity and humanity
in believers, as well as in asserting that God Himself, not
merely His gifts, dwell in Christians. (935, 54; 937, 65.)
In addition to the aberrations enumerated, Article III
rejects also some of the Roman and the Romanizing
errors concerning justification in the Leipzig Interim,
and some views entertained by Majorists which are
extensively and ex professo dealt with in Article IV.
(CONC. TRIGL. 917, 5.)

