---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XVII. The Antinomistic Controversy.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 17
---

#### 183. Distinction between Law and Gospel of Paramount Import.

Zwingli, who was a moralist and a Humanist rather
than a truly evangelical reformer, taught: "In itself the
Law is nothing else than a Gospel; that is, a good, certain
message from God by means of which He instructs us
concerning His will."(Frank 2, 312.) While Zwingli thus
practically identified Law and Gospel, Luther, throughout
his life, held that the difference between both is as
great as that between life and death or the merits of
Christ and our own sinful works; and that no one can
be a true minister of the Christian Church who is
unable properly to distinguish and apply them. For,
according to Luther, a commingling of the Law and the
Gospel necessarily leads to a corruption of the doctrine
of justification, the very heart of Christianity. And as
both must be carefully distinguished, so both must also
be upheld and preached in the Church; for the Gospel
presupposes the Law and is rendered meaningless without
it. Wherever the Law is despised, disparaged, and
corrupted, the Gospel, too, cannot be kept intact.
Whenever the Law is assailed, even if this be done in the
name of the Gospel, the latter is, in reality, hit harder
than the former. The cocoon of antinomianism always
bursts into antigospelism.

Majorism, the mingling of sanctification and justification,
and synergism, the mingling of nature and
grace, were but veiled efforts to open once more the
doors of the Lutheran Church to the Roman work righteousness,
which Luther had expelled. The same is
true of antinomianism in all its forms. It amounts to
nothing less than apostasy from true Evangelicalism
and a return to Romanism. When Luther opposed
Agricola, the father of the Antinomians in the days of
the Reformation, he did so with the clear knowledge
that the Gospel of Jesus Christ with its doctrine of justification
by grace and faith alone was at stake and in
need of defense. "By these spirits," said he, "the devil
does not intend to rob us of the Law, but of Christ, who
fulfilled the Law." (St. L. 20, 1614, Pieper, Dogm. 3, 279;
Frank 2, 268. 325.)

With the same interest in view, to save the Gospel
from corruption, the Formula of Concord opposes
antinomianism and urges that the distinction between
the Law and the Gospel be carefully preserved. The
opening paragraph of Article V, "Of the Law and the
Gospel," reads: "As the distinction between the Law and
Gospel is a special brilliant light which serves to the end
that God's Word may be rightly divided, and the
Scriptures of the holy prophets and apostles may be
properly explained and understood, we must guard it
with especial care, in order that these two doctrines may
not be mingled with one another, or a Law be made out
of the Gospel, whereby the merit of Christ is obscured
and troubled consciences are robbed of their comfort,
which they otherwise have in the holy Gospel when it is
preached genuinely and in its purity, and by which they
can support themselves in their most grievous trials
against the terrors of the Law." (951, 1.) The concluding
paragraph of this article declares that the proper distinction
between the Law and the Gospel must be preserved,
"in order that both doctrines, that of the Law
and that of the Gospel, be not mingled and confounded
with one another, and what belongs to the one may
not be ascribed to the other,whereby the merit and benefits
of Christ are easily obscured and the Gospel is
again turned into a doctrine of the Law, as has occurred
in the Papacy, and thus Christians are deprived of the
true comfort which they have in the Gospel against the
terrors of the Law, and the door is again opened in the
Church of God to the Papacy." (961, 27.) The blessed
Gospel, our only comfort and consolation against the
terrors of the Law, will be corrupted wherever the Law
and the Gospel are not properly distinguished,-such,
then, was the view also of the Formula of Concord.

Articles V and VI of the Formula treat and dispose
of the issues raised by the Antinomians. In both Luther's
doctrine is maintained and reaffirmed.Article V,"Of the
Law and Gospel,"teaches that, in the proper sense of the
term, everything is Law that reveals and rebukes sin, the
sin of unbelief in Christ and the Gospel included; that
Gospel, in the proper and narrow sense, is nothing but
a proclamation and preaching of grace and forgiveness
of sin, that, accordingly, the Law as well as the Gospel are
needed and must be retained and preached in the
Church. This was precisely what Luther had taught. In
one of his theses against Agricola he says: "Whatever
discloses sin, wrath, or death exercises the office of the
Law; Law and the disclosing of sin or the revelation of
wrath are convertible terms. Quidquid ostendit peccatum,
iram seu mortem, id exercet officium legis; lex et
ostensio peccati seu revelatio irae sunt termini convertibiles."
Article VI "Of the Third Use of the Law," teaches
that although Christians, in as far as they are regenerate,
do the will of God spontaneously, the Law must nevertheless
be preached to them on account of their Old
Adam, not only as a mirror revealing their sins and as a
check on the lusts of the flesh, but also as a rule of their
lives. This, too, is precisely what Luther had maintained
against Agricola: "The Law," said he, "must be retained
[in the Church], that the saints may know which are the
works God requires." (Drews,Disputationen Dr.Martin
Luthers, 418; Herzog R. I, 688; Frank 2, 272; Tschackert,
482.)

#### 184.Agricola Breeding Trouble.

In the Lutheran Church antinomianism appeared
in a double form: one chiefly before the other after the
death of Luther. The first of these conflicts was originated
by Agricola who spoke most contemptuously and
disparagingly of the Law of God, teaching, in particular,
that true knowledge of sin and genuine contrition is
produced, not by the Law, but by the Gospel only, and
that hence there is in the Church no use whatever for
the Law of God. After Luther's death similar antinomistic
errors were entertained and defended by the
Philippists in Wittenberg, who maintained that the sin
of unbelief is rebuked not by the Law, but by the Gospel.
Poach, Otto, and others denied that, with respect to
good works, the Law was of any service whatever to
Christians after their conversion.

Barring Carlstadt and similar spirits, John Agricola
(Schnitter, Kornschneider, Magister Islebius-Luther
called him Grickel) was the first to strike a discordant
note and breed trouble within the Lutheran Church.
Born April 20, 1492, at Eisleben, he studied at Leipzig,
and from 1515 to 1516 at Wittenberg.

Here he became an enthusiastic adherent and a
close friend of Luther and also of Melanchthon, after
the latter's arrival in 1518. In 1539 Luther himself
declared that Agricola had been "one of his best and
closest friends." (St. L. 20, 1612.) In 1519 he accompanied
both to the great debate in Leipzig. In 1525 he
became teacher of the Latin school and though never
ordained, pastor of the church in Eisleben. Being a
speaker of some renown he was frequently engaged by
the Elector of Saxony, especially on his journeys-to
Speyer 1526 and 1529, to Augsburg 1530, to Vienna
1535. At Eisleben, Agricola was active also in a literary
way, publishing sermons, a catechism, and, 1526, a
famous collection of 300 German proverbs (the
Wittenberg edition of 1592 contains 750 proverbs).

When the new theological professorship created
1526 at Wittenberg was given to Melanchthon, Agricola
felt slighted and much disappointed. In the following
year he made his first antinomian attack upon
Melanchthon. The dispute was settled by Luther, but
only for a time. In 1536 Agricola, through the influence
of Luther (whose hospitality also he and his large family
on their arrival in Wittenberg enjoyed for more than
six weeks), received an appointment at the university.
He rewarded his generous friend with intrigues and
repeated renewals of the antinomian quarrels, now
directing his attacks also against his benefactor. By 1540
matters had come to such a pass that the Elector felt
constrained to institute a formal trial against the secret
plotter, which Agricola escaped only by accepting a call
of Joachim II as courtpreacher and superintendent at
Berlin. After Luther's death, Agricola, as described in a
preceding chapter, degraded and discredited himself by
helping Pflug and Sidonius to prepare the Augsburg
Interim (1547), and by endeavoring to enforce this infamous
document in Brandenburg. He died September
22 1566.

Vanity, ambition, conceit, insincerity, impudence,
arrogance, and ungratefulness were the outstanding
traits of Agricola's character. Luther said that Agricola,
swelled with vanity and ambition, was more vexatious
to him than any pope; that he was fit only for the profession
of a jester, etc. December 6 1540, Luther wrote to
Jacob Stratner, courtpreacher in Berlin:"Master Grickel
is not nor ever will be, the man that he may appear or
the Margrave may consider him to be.For if you wish to
know what vanity itself is you can recognize it in no
surer image than that of Eisleben. Si enim velis scire,
quidnam ipsa vanitas sit, nulla certiore imagine cognosces
quam lslebii." (St. L. 21b, 2536.) Flacius reports that
shortly before Luther's death, when some endeavored to
excuse Agricola, the former answered angrily: "Why
endeavor to excuse Eisleben? Eisleben is incited by the
devil, who has taken possession of him entirely.You will
see what a stir he will make after my death! Ihr werdet
wohl erfahren,was er nach meinem Tod fuer einen Laerm
wird anrichten!" (Preger 1, 119.)

#### 185.Agricola's Conflict with Melanchthon.

The antinomian views that repentance (contrition)
is not wrought by the Law, but by the Gospel, and that
hence there is no room for the Law and its preaching in
the Christian Church, were uttered by Agricola as early
as 1525. In his Annotations to the Gospel of St. Luke of
that year he had written: "The Decalog belongs in the
courthouse, not in the pulpit. All those who are occupied
with Moses are bound to go to the devil.To the gallows
with Moses !" (Tschackert 481;Herzog R. 1, 688; E.
4, 423.) The public dispute began two years later when
Agricola criticized Melanchthon because in the latter's
"Instructions to the Visitors of the Churches of Saxony"
(Articles of Visitation, Articuli, de quibus Egerunt per
Visitatores in Regione Saxionae, 1527) the ministers were
urged first to preach the Law to their spiritually callous
people in order to produce repentance (contrition), and
thus to prepare them for saving faith in the Gospel the
only source of truly good works. Melanchthon had
written: "Pastors must follow the example of Christ.
Since He taught repentance and remission of sins, pastors
also must teach these to their churches. At present
it is common to vociferate concerning faith, and yet one
cannot understand what faith is, unless repentance is
preached. Plainly they pour new wine into old bottles
who preach faith without repentance, without the doctrine
of the fear of God, without the doctrine of the
Law, and accustom the people to a certain carnal security,
which is worse than all former errors under the
Pope have been." (C. R. 26, 9.) Agricola considered these
and similar exhortations of Melanchthon unfriendly
and Romanizing, and published his dissent in his 130
Questions for Young Children, where he displayed a
shocking contempt for the Old Testament and the Law
of God. In particular, he stressed the doctrine that genuine
repentance (contrition) is wrought, not by the
Law, but by the Gospel only. In letters to his friends,
Agricola at the same time charged Melanchthon with
corrupting the evangelical doctrine. (Frank 2, 252.)

At a meeting held at Torgau, November 26 to 28,
1527, the differences were discussed by Agricola and
Melanchthon in the presence of Luther and
Bugenhagen. The exact issue was: Does faith presuppose
contrition? Melanchthon affirmed the question,
and Agricola denied it. Luther finally effected an agreement
by distinguishing between general and justifying
faith, and by explaining that repentance (contrition),
indeed, presupposes a general faith in God, but that justifying
faith presupposes the terrors of conscience (contrition)
wrought by the Law. His decision ran "that the
term faith should be applied to justifying faith which
consoles us in these terrors [produced by the threats of
the Law] but that the word repentance correctly
includes a general faith," viz., that there is a God who
threatens transgressors, etc. (C. R. 1, 916.) In agreement
herewith Melanchthon wrote in the German Unterricht
der Visitatoren, published 1528 at Wittenberg, that, in
the wider and more general sense, the term "faith"
embraces contrition and the Law, but that in the interest
of the common people the word "faith" should be
reserved for the special Christian or justifying faith in
Christ. We read: "Denn wiewohl etliche achten, man
solle nichts lehren vor dem Glauben, sondern die Busse
aus und nach dem Glauben folgend lehren, auf dass die
Widersacher [Papisten] nicht sagen moegen, man
widerrufe unsere vorige Lehre, so ist aber doch anzusehen,
weil [dass] die Busse und Gesetz auch zu dem
gemeinen Glauben gehoeren.Denn man muss ja zuvor
glauben, dass Gott sei, der da drohe, gebiete, schrecke
usw. So sei es fuer den gemeinen, groben Mann, dass
man solche Stuecke des Glaubens lasse bleiben unter
dem Namen Busse, Gebot, Gesetz, Furcht usw., auf dass
sie desto unterschiedlicher den Glauben Christi verstehen,
welchen die Apostel iustificantem fidem, das ist,
der da gerecht macht und Suende vertilgt, nennen,
welches der Glaube von dem Gebot und Busse nicht tut
und doch der gemeine Mann ueber dem Wort Glauben
irre wird und Fragen aufbringt ohne Nutzen." (C. R. 26,
51f.)

#### 186. Luther's First Disputation against the Antinomians.

At Wittenberg, in 1537, Agricola renewed his antinomianism
by secretly and anonymously circulating a
number of propositions (Positiones inter Fratres
Sparsae) directed against both Luther and
Melanchthon, whom he branded as "contortors of the
words of Christ," urging all to resist them in order to
preserve the pure doctrine. Quotations from Luther and
Melanchthon were appended to the theses in order to
show that their teaching concerning the "mode of justification
(modus iustificationis)" was sometimes "pure,"
sometimes "impure." Agricola wrote: "Impure [among
the statements of Melanchthon and Luther] are: 1. In
the Saxon Visitation: 'Since Christ commands that
repentance and remission of sins is to be preached in
His name, hence the Decalog is to be taught,' 2.Again ...
'As the Gospel therefore teaches that the Law has been
given to humiliate us, in order that we may seek Christ,'
etc. 3. In his Commentary on the Epistle to the
Galatians Luther says that it is the office of the Law to
torment and to terrify the conscience, that it may know
Christ more readily.Many similar passages are found in
this commentary, which we reject as false, in order to
maintain the purity of the doctrine." (E., v. a 4, 422f.; St.
L. 20, 1627.)

Luther answered by publishing,December 1, 1537,
the theses of Agricola together with Other Antinomian
Articles (Alii Articuli Antinomi), compiled from written
and verbal expressions of Agricola and his followers. In
his introductory remarks Luther not only disowned and
emphatically condemned (nos ab eiusmodi portentis
prorsus abhorrere) Agricola's Positiones inter Fratres
Sparsae, but also announced a number of disputations
against antinomianism. (E. 4, 420.) The first was held
December 18, 1537, in which Luther maintained:
Contrition is wrought by the preaching of the Law; but
a man is able to make a good resolution and to hate sin
out of love toward God only after the Gospel has comforted
his alarmed conscience.

Following are some of the 39 theses discussed by
Luther in his first disputation against the Antinomians:
"4. The first part of repentance, contrition, is [wrought]
by the Law alone. The other part, the good purpose,
cannot be [wrought] by the Law. 24. And they [the
Antinomians] teach perniciously that the Law of God is
simply to be removed from the church, which is blasphemous
and sacrilegious. 25. For the entire Scripture
teaches that repentance must begin from the Law,
which also the order of the matter itself as well as experience
shows. 31.Necessarily, then, sin and death cannot
be revealed by the Word of Grace and Solace, but by the
Law. 32. Experience teaches that Adam is first reproved
as a transgressor of the Law and afterwards cheered by
the promised Seed of the woman. 33. Also David is first
killed by the Law through Nathan, saying: 'Thou art the
man,' etc.-afterwards he is saved by the Gospel, declaring:
'Thou shalt not die,' etc. [2 Sam. 12, 7. 13.] 34. Paul,
prostrated by the Law, first hears: 'Why persecutest thou
Me?'Afterwards he is revived by the Gospel: 'Arise,' etc.
[Acts 9, 4. 6.] 35. And Christ Himself says, Mark I, 15:
'Repent ye and believe the Gospel, for the kingdom of
God is at hand,' 36.Again:'Repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in His name,' [Luke 24, 47.] 37.
Likewise the Spirit first reproves the world of sin, in
order to teach faith in Christ, i.e., forgiveness of sin.
[John 16, 8.] 38. In the Epistle to the Romans Paul
observes this method, first to teach that all are sinners,
and thereupon, that they are to be justified solely
through Christ." (Drews, 253ff.; St. L. 20, 1628ff.)

#### 187. Luther's Second Disputation against the Antinomians.

Since Agricola did not appear at the first public disputation
against the Antinomians, moreover secretly
["im Winkel"] continued his opposition and intrigues,
Luther insisted that his privilege of lecturing at the university
be withdrawn. Thus brought to terms Agricola,
through his wife, sued for reconciliation. Luther
demanded a retraction to be made at his next disputation,
which was held January 12, 1538. (Drews, 248.
334f.; C. R. 25, 64; 3, 482f.) Here Luther explained that,
though not necessary to justification, the Law must not
be cast out of the church, its chief object being to reveal
the guilt of sin; moreover, that the Law must be taught
to maintain outward discipline, to reveal sin, and to
show Christians what works are pleasing to God.
(Drews, 418.)

Following are some of the 48 theses discussed by
Luther in his second disputation: "3.When treating of
justification, one cannot say too much against the
inability of the Law [to save] and against the most pernicious trust in the Law. 4. For the Law was not given to
justify or vivify or help in any way toward righteousness.
5. But to reveal sin and work wrath, i.e., to render the
conscience guilty. [Rom. 3, 20; 4, 15.] 8. In brief, as far as
heaven is from the earth, so far must the Law be separated
from justification. 9. And nothing is to be taught,
said, or thought in the matter of justification but only
the word of the grace exhibited in Christ. 10. From this,
however, it does not follow that the Law is to be abolished
and excluded from the preaching of [done in] the
church. 11. Indeed, just for the reason that not only is it
not necessary to justification, but also cannot effect it, it
is the more necessary to teach and urge it. 12. In order
that man, who is proud and trusts in his own powers,
may be instructed that he cannot be justified by the Law.
18. Whatever reveals sin, wrath, or death exercises the
office of the Law, whether it be in the Old or in the New
Testament. 19. For to reveal sin is nothing else, nor can
it be anything else, than the Law or an effect and the
peculiar power of the Law. 20. Law and revelation of sin
or of wrath are convertible terms. 24. So that it is impossible
for sin to be,or to be known,without the Law written
or inscribed [in the heart]. 27.And since the Law of
God requires our obedience toward God, these
Antinomians (nomomachi) abolish also obedience
toward God. 28. From this it is manifest that Satan
through these his instruments teaches about sin, repentance,
and Christ in words only (verbaliter tantum). 29.
But in reality he takes away Christ, repentance, sin, and
the entire Scripture, together with God, its Author. 46.
For the Law, as it was before Christ, did indeed accuse
us; but under Christ it is appeased through the forgiveness
of sins, and thereafter it is to be fulfilled through the
Spirit. 47. Therefore the Law will never, in all eternity, be
abolished, but will remain, either to be fulfilled by the
damned, or already fulfilled by the blessed. 48. These
pupils of the devil however, seem to think that the Law
is temporary only, which ceased under Christ even as
circumcision did." (Drews, 336ff.; St. L. 20, 1632ff.)

Following is a summary of the views expressed by
Luther in his second disputation: "Why is the Law to be
taught? The Law is to be taught on account of discipline,
according to the word of Paul, 1 Tim. 1, 9: 'The Law is
made for the lawless,' and that by this pedagogy men
might come to Christ as Paul says to the Galatians (3,
24): 'The Law was our schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ,' In the second place, the Law is to be taught to
reveal sin, to accuse, terrify, and damn the consciences,
Rom. 3, 20: 'By the Law is the knowledge of sin;' again,
chapter 4, 15: 'The Law worketh wrath,' In the third
place, the Law is to be retained that the saints may know
what kind of works God requires in which they may
exercise their obedience toward God. Lex est retinenda,
ut sciant sancti, quaenam opera requirat Deus, in quibus
obedientiam exercere erga Deum possint." (Drews, 418;
Herzog R. 1, 688.)

#### 188. Third and Fourth Series of Luther's Theses against Antinomianism.

Having complied with the conditions, and publicly
(also in two sermons delivered April 23) retracted his
error, and declared his assent to the views expressed in
Luther's second disputation,Agricola was again permitted
to preach and teach.As a result, Luther also, though
he had no faith in the sincerity of Agricola's retraction,
did not carry out his original plan of discussing a third
and fourth series of theses which he had prepared
against antinomianism. (Drews, 419ff.; E. 4, 430ff.)

From the third series, comprising 40 theses, we
quote the following: "1. The repentance of the Papists,
Turks, Jews, and of all unbelievers and hypocrites is alike
in every respect. 2. It consists in this, that they are sorry
and make satisfaction for one or several sins, and afterwards
are secure as to other sins or original sin. 5. The
repentance of believers in Christ goes beyond the actual
sins, and continues throughout life, till death. 8. For
the sin in our flesh remains during the entire time of
our life, warring against the Spirit, who resists it. [Rom.
7, 23.] 9. Therefore all works after justification are nothing
else than a continuous repentance, or a good purpose
against sin. 10. For nothing else is done than that
sin, revealed by the Law and forgiven in Christ, is swept
out. 17. The Lord's Prayer, taught by the Lord Himself
to the saints and believers, is a part of repentance, containing
much of the doctrine of the Law. 18. For whoever
prays it aright confesses with his own mouth that
he sins against the Law and repents. 27. Therefore also
the Lord's Prayer itself teaches that the Law is before,
below, and after the Gospel (legem esse ante, sub et post
evangelium), and that from it repentance must begin.
30. From this it follows that these enemies of the Law
[Antinomians] must abolish also the Lord's Prayer if
they abolish the Law. 31. Indeed, they are compelled to
expunge the greatest part of the sermons of Christ
Himself from the Gospel-story. 32. For Matt. 5, 17ff.He
does not only recite the Law of Moses, but explains it
perfectly, and teaches that it must not be destroyed. 34.
Everywhere throughout the Gospel He also reproves,
rebukes, threatens, and exercises similar offices of the
Law. 35. So that there never has been nor ever will be
more impudent men than those who teach that the Law
should be abolished." (St. L. 20, 1636ff.; E. 4, 430ff.)

From the fourth series of 41 theses directed by
Luther against the Antinomians we quote: "12.
Therefore we must beware of the doctrine of the Papists
concerning repentance as of hell and the devil himself.
13. Much more, however, must we avoid those who
leave no repentance whatever in the Church. 14. For
those who deny that the Law is to be taught in reality
simply wish that there be no repentance. 15. The argument:'
Whatever is not necessary to justification, neither
in the beginning, nor in the middle, nor in the end,
must not be taught,' etc., amounts to nothing. 17. It is
the same as though you would argue: The truth that
man is dead in sin is not necessary to justification, neither
in the beginning, nor in the middle, nor in the end;
hence it must not be taught. 18.To honor parents, to live
chaste, to abstain from murders, adulteries, and thefts is
not necessary to justification; hence such things must
not be taught. 22. Although the Law helps nothing
toward justification it does not follow therefrom that it
ought to be abolished and not to be taught. 26.
Everywhere in Paul [the phrase] 'without the Law'must
be understood (as Augustine correctly explains) 'without
the assistance of the Law,' as we have always done.
27. For the Law demands fulfilment, but helps nothing
toward its own fulfilment. 35. But faith in Christ alone
justifies, alone fulfils the Law, alone does good works,
without the Law. 37. It is true that after justification
good works follow spontaneously,without the Law, i.e.,
without the help or coercion of the Law. 38. In brief, the
Law is neither useful nor necessary for justification, nor
for any good works,much less for salvation. 39. On the
contrary, justification, good works, and salvation are
necessary for the fulfilment of the Law. 40. For Christ
came to save that which was lost [Luke 19, {{< hiddenanchor 10 >}}10{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, and for
the restitution of all things, as St. Peter says [Acts 3, {{< hiddenanchor 21 >}}21{{< /hiddenanchor >}}.
41. Therefore the Law is not destroyed by Christ, but
established, in order that Adam may become such as he
was, and even better." (St. L. 20. 1639ff.: E. 4. 433.)

#### 189. Luther's Third Public Disputation against the Antinomians.

Soon after his second disputation Luther obtained
evidence of Agricola's relapse into his former errors and
ways. The upshot was another disputation on a fifth
series of theses held September 13, 1538, in which
Luther denounced the Antinomians as deceivers, who
lulled their hearers into carnal security. He also
explained that the passages culled from his own writings
were torn from their historical context, and hence
misinterpreted.His former statements, said Luther, had
been addressed to consciences already alarmed, and
therefore in immediate need of the consolation of the
Gospel; while now the Antinomians applied them to
secure consciences, who, first of all, were in need of the
terrifying power of the Law. (Drews, 421f.; Tschackert,
482.)

From the 70 theses treated by Luther in his third
disputation, we submit the following: "1. The Law has
dominion over man as long as he lives. [Rom. 7, 1.] 2.
But he is freed from the Law when he dies. 3.
Necessarily, therefore, man must die if he would be free
from the Law. 7. These three: Law, sin, and death, are
inseparable. 8.Accordingly so far as death is still in man,
in so far sin and the Law are in man. 9. Indeed, in Christ
the Law is fulfilled, sin abolished, and death destroyed.
11. That is, when, through faith we are crucified and
have died in Christ, such things [the Law fulfilled, sin
abolished, and death destroyed] are true also in us. 13.
But the fact itself and experience testify that the just are
still daily delivered to death. 14.Necessarily, therefore, in
as far as they are under death, they are still also under
the Law and sin. 15. They [the Antinomians] are altogether
inexperienced men and deceivers of souls who
endeavor to abolish the Law from the church. 16. For
this is not only foolish and wicked, but also absolutely
impossible. 17. For if you would abolish the Law, you
will be compelled to abolish also sin and death. 18. For
death and sin are present by virtue of the Law, as Paul
says [2 Cor. 3, {{< hiddenanchor 6 >}}6{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'The letter killeth,' and [1 Cor. 15, {{< hiddenanchor 56 >}}56{{< /hiddenanchor >}}:
'The strength of sin is the Law,' 19.But since you see that
the just die daily what a folly is it to imagine that they
are without the Law! 20. For if there were no Law, there
would be neither sin nor death. 21. Hence they should
have first proved that the just are altogether without sin
and death. 22. Or that they no longer live in the flesh,
but are removed from the world. 23. Then it might justly
be taught that also the Law is altogether removed
from them and must not be taught in any way. 24. This
they cannot prove, but experience itself shows the contrary
to their very faces. 25. So, then, the impudence of
the teachers who wish to remove the Law from the
church is extraordinary. 26. Yet it is a much greater
impudence, or rather insanity, when they assert that
even the wicked should be freed from the Law, and that
it should not be preached to them. 29. If, however, they
pretend that their church or their hearers simply are all
pious men and Christians,without the Law, 30. Then it
is evident that they are altogether of unsound mind and
do not know what they say or affirm. 31. For this is
nothing else than to imagine that all their hearers have
been removed from this life. 35.Thus it [the Law] is also
given to the pious, in so far as they are not yet dead and
still live in the flesh. 40.Now, in as far as Christ is raised
in us, in so far we are without Law, sin, and death. 41.
But in as far as He is not yet raised in us, in so far we are
under the Law, sin, and death. 42. Therefore the Law (as
also the Gospel) must be preached,without discrimination,
to the righteous as well as to the wicked. 44. To the
pious, that they may thereby be reminded to crucify
their flesh with its affections and lusts, lest they become
secure. [Gal. 5, 24.] 45. For security abolishes faith and
the fear of God, and renders the latter end worse than
the beginning. [2 Pet. 2, 20.] 46. It appears very clearly
that the Antinomians imagine sin to have been removed
through Christ essentially and philosophically or juridically
(formaliter et philosophice seu iuridice) 47.And that
they do not at all know that sin is removed only inasmuch
as the merciful God does not impute it [Ps. 32, {{< hiddenanchor 2 >}}2{{< /hiddenanchor >}},
and forgives it (solum reputatione et ignoscentia Dei miserentis).
61. For if the Law is removed, no one knows
what Christ is, or what He did when He fulfilled the Law
for us. 66. The doctrine of the Law, therefore, is necessary
in the churches, and by all means is to be retained,
as without it Christ cannot be retained. 67.For what will
you retain of Christ when (the Law having been
removed which He fulfilled) you do not know what He
has fulfilled? 69. In brief, to remove the Law and to let
sin and death remain, is to hide the disease of sin and
death to men unto their perdition. 70.When death and
sin are abolished (as was done by Christ), then the Law
would be removed happily; moreover, it would be
established,Rom. 3, 31."(Drews 423ff.; St. L. 20, 1642ff.;
E. 4, 436ff.)

#### 190. Agricola's Retraction Written and Published by Luther.

Seeing his position in the Wittenberg University
endangered, Agricola was again ready to submit. And
when a public retraction was demanded, he even left it
to Luther to formulate the recantation. Luther did so in
a public letter to Caspar Guettel in Eisleben, entitled,
Against the Antinomians-Wider die Antinomer, which
he published in the beginning of January, 1539. (St. L.
20, 1610.) In a crushing manner Luther here denounced
"the specter of the new spirits who dare thrust the Law
or the Ten Commandments out of the church and relegate
it to the courthouse."

Complaining of "false brethren," Luther here says:
"And I fear that, if I had died at Smalcald [{{< hiddenanchor 1537 >}}1537{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, I
should forever have been called the patron of such
[antinomian] spirits, because they appeal to my books.
And all this they do behind my back, without my
knowledge and against my will, not even considering it
worth while to inform me with as much as a word or
syllable, or at least to ask me regarding the matter. Thus
I am compelled to proceed against Magister John
Agricola," etc. (1611.) "But since he was afraid that he
might not express it in a manner such as would be considered
satisfactory, he has fully authorized and also
requested me to do it [write the retraction for Agricola]
as well as I could, which, he being satisfied, I agreed to
do, and herewith have done, especially for the reason
that after my death neither Master Eisleben himself nor
anybody else might be able to pretend that I had done
nothing in this matter and simply allowed everything to
pass and go on as fully satisfactory to me." (1612.)

Referring to his former statements appealed to by
Agricola, Luther continues: "I have indeed taught, and
still teach, that sinners should be led to repentance by
the preaching of, and meditation upon, the suffering of
Christ, so that they may realize how great God's wrath
is over sin, seeing that there is no other help against it
than that God's Son must die for it ... But how does it
follow from this that the Law must be abandoned? I am
unable to discover such an inference in my logic, and
would like to see and hear the master who would be able
to prove it.When Isaiah says, chap. 53, 8: 'For the transgression
of My people was He stricken,' tell me, dear
friend, is the Law abandoned when here the suffering of
Christ is preached? What does 'for the transgression of
My people' mean? Does it not mean: because My people
have sinned against, and not kept,My Law? Or can
any one imagine that sin is something where there is no
law? Whoever abolishes the Law must with it also abolish
sins. If he would allow sins to remain, he must much
more allow the Law to remain.For Rom.6, 13 [4, {{< hiddenanchor 15 >}}15{{< /hiddenanchor >}} we
read: 'Sin is not imputed where there is no law.' If there
is no sin Christ is nothing. For why does He die if there
be neither Law nor sin for which He was to die? From
this we see that by this spiritism [Geisterei] the devil
does not mean to take away the Law, but Christ, who
fulfilled the Law. [Matt. 5, 17.] For he well knows that
Christ may well and easily be taken away, but not so the
Law, which is written in the heart." (1613f.) "Therefore
I request of you,my dear Doctor [Guettel], that, as you
have done heretofore, you would continue in the pure
doctrine and preach that sinners should and must be
led to repentance not only by the sweet grace and suffering
of Christ, who has died for us, but also by the terrors
of the Law." (1615.) "For whence do we know what
sin is if there is no Law and conscience? And whence
shall we learn what Christ is, what He has done for us, if
we are not to know what the Law is which He has fulfilled
for us, or what sin is, for which He has atoned?
And even if we did not need the Law for us and were
able to tear it out of our hearts (which is impossible),we
nevertheless must preach it for the sake of Christ (as
also is done and must be done), in order that we may
know what He has done and suffered for us. For who
could know what and for what purpose Christ has suffered
for us if no one were to know what sin or the Law
is? Therefore the Law must certainly be preached if we
would preach Christ." (1616.) "This, too, is a peculiar
blindness and folly, that they imagine the revelation of
wrath to be something else than the Law (which is
impossible); for the revelation of wrath is the Law when
realized and felt, as Paul says [Rom. 4, {{< hiddenanchor 15 >}}15{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'Lex iram
operatur. The Law worketh wrath.' "(1618.)

By way of conclusion Luther remarked: "Let this
suffice at present, for I hope that since Master Eisleben
is converted and retracts, the others, too,who received it
[the antinomian error] from him, will abandon it,
which God may help them to do! Amen." (1619.) At the
same time, however he did not withhold the opinion
that Agricola's self humiliation would hardly be of long
duration."If he continues in such humility,"said Luther,
"God certainly can and will exalt him; if he abandons it,
then God is able to hurl him down again." (1612.)

#### 191. Luther's Fourth Disputation against the Antinomians.

Luther's distrust was not unfounded, for Agricola
continued secretly to teach his antinomianism, abetted
in his sentiments among others also by Jacob Schenck
[since 1536 first Lutheran pastor in Freiberg, Saxony;
1538 dismissed on account of his antinomianism 1540
professor in Leipzig; later on deposed and finally banished
from Saxony]. Indeed in March, 1540, Agricola
even lodged a complaint with the Elector, charging
Luther with "calumnies." In the first part of the following
month Luther answered these charges in a Report to
Doctor Brueck Concerning Magister John Eisleben's
Doctrine and Intrigues (St. L. 20, 1648ff.) About the
same time; Count Albrecht of Mansfeld denounced
Agricola to the Elector as a dangerous, troublesome
man. Hereupon the Elector on June 15 1540, opened
formal legal proceedings against Agricola, who, as stated
above, removed to Berlin in August without awaiting
the trial, although he had promised with an oath not to
leave before a legal decision had been rendered. (Drews,
611.) Incensed by the treacherous conduct of Agricola,
Luther, September 10, 1540, held a final disputation on
a sixth series of theses against the Antinomians, charging
them with destroying all order human as well as
divine. (St. L. 20, 1647; 4, 441.)

Regarding Agricola's duplicity, Luther, in his Report
to Brueck, said in substance: According to the statements
of Caspar Guettel and Wendelin Faber, Agricola
had for years secretly agitated against the Wittenbergers
and founded a sect at Eisleben calling themselves
Minorish [Minorists]; he had branded and slandered
their doctrine as false and impure, and this, too,without
conferring with them or previously admonishing them;
he had come to Wittenberg for the purpose of corrupting
and distracting the Church; his adherents had made
the statement that Eisleben would teach the
Wittenbergers theology and logic; he had inveigled
Hans Lufft into printing his Postil by falsely stating that
it had been read and approved by Luther; in his dealings
with the Wittenbergers he had acted not as an honest
man, let alone a pious Christian and theologian, but
treacherously and in keeping with his antinomian principles;
parading as a loyal Lutheran at public conventions
and laughing and dining with them, he had misled
"his old, faithful friend" [Luther] to confide in him,
while secretly he was acting the traitor by maligning
him and undermining his work. In the Report we read:
"Agricola blasphemes and damns our doctrine as
impure and false (i.e., the Holy Spirit Himself in His
holy Law); he slanders and defames us Wittenbergers
most infamously wherever he can; and all this he does
treacherously and secretly, although we have done him
no harm, but only did well by him, as he himself must
admit. He deceives and attacks us [me], his best friend
and father, making me believe that he is our true friend.
Nor does he warn me, but, like a desperate treacherous
villain, secretly works behind our back to cause the people
to forsake our doctrine and to adhere to him, thus
treating us with an ungratefulness, pride, and haughtiness
such as I have not frequently met with before."
(1656.)

In his charge against Luther, Agricola had said that
it was dangerous to preach the Law without the Gospel,
because it was a ministry of death (ministerium mortis). Luther answered in his Report to Brueck: "Behold now
what the mad fool does. God has given His Law for the
very purpose that it should bite, cut, strike, kill, and sacrifice
the old man. For it should terrify and punish the
proud ignorant, secure Old Adam and show him his sin
and death, so that, being humiliated, he may despair of
himself, and thus become desirous of grace, as St. Paul
says: 'The strength of sin is the Law; the sting of death is
sin,'[1 Cor. 15, 56.] For this reason he also calls it bonam,
iustam, sanctam-good, just, holy. Again, Jeremiah [23,
{{< hiddenanchor 29 >}}29{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'My Word is like a hammer that breaketh the rock
to pieces,'Again: 'Ego ignis consumens, etc.-I am a consuming fire,' Ps. 9, 21 [{{< hiddenanchor 20 >}}20{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'Constitue legislatorem super
eos, ut sciant gentes, se esse homines, non deos, nec Deo
similes-Put them in fear,O Lord, that the nations may
know themselves to be but men,' Thus St. Paul does
Rom.1 and 2 and 3 making all the world sinners by the
Law, casting them under the wrath of God, and entirely
killing them before God. But here our dear Master
Grickel appears on the scene and invents a new theology
out of his own mad and reckless fool's head and
teaches: One must not kill and reprove the people, i.e.,
one must not preach the Law. Here he himself confesses
publicly in his suit [against Luther] that he has condemned
and prohibited the preaching of the Law." (St.
L. 20, 1657.)

The Report continues: "Since, now, the little angry
devil who rides Master Grickel will not tolerate the Law,
i.e., mortificantem, irascentem, accusantem, terrentem,
occidentem legem,-the mortifying, raging, accusing,
terrifying, killing Law,-it is quite evident what he
intends to do through Master Grickel's folly (for he nevertheless
wishes to be praised as preaching the Law after
and under the Gospel, etc.), viz., to hide original sin and
to teach the Law no further than against future actual
sins, for such is the manner of his entire Postil; even as
the Turks, Jews, philosophers, and Papists teach who
regard our nature as sound; but Master Grickel does not
see that it is just this which his little spirit [devil] aims at
by his bragging and boasting, that he, too, is preaching
the Law ... Thus Christ and God are altogether vain and
lost. And is not this blindness beyond all blindness that
he does not want to preach the Law without and before
the Gospel? For are these not impossible things? How is
it possible to preach of forgiveness of sins if previously
there have been no sins? How can one proclaim life if
previously there is no death? Are we to preach to angels
who have neither sin nor death concerning forgiveness
of sins and redemption from death? But how can one
preach of sins or know that there are sins, if the Law
does not reveal them? For according to its proper office
the Gospel does not say who [is a sinner] and what is
sin; it does, however, indicate that there must be some
great hurt, since so great a remedy is required; but it
does not say how the sin is called, or what it is. The Law
must do this.Thus Master Eisleben must in fact (re ipsa)
allow the Law to perform its duty (occidere, to kill, etc.)
prior to the [preaching of the] Gospel, no matter how
decidedly he, with words only, denies it, to spite the
Wittenbergers, in order that he also, as novus autor (new
author), may produce something of his own and confuse
the people and separate the churches." (1658.)

From the 20 theses which Luther treated in his last
disputation against the Antinomians we cull the following:
"1. The inference of St. Paul: 'For where no law is
there is no transgression' [Rom. 4, {{< hiddenanchor 15 >}}15{{< /hiddenanchor >}} is valid not only
theologically, but also politically and naturally (non
solum theologice, sed etiam politice et naturaliter). 2.
Likewise this too:Where there is no sin, there is neither
punishment nor remission. 3. Likewise this too:Where
there is neither punishment nor remission, there is neither
wrath nor grace. 4. Likewise this too:Where there
is neither wrath nor grace, there is neither divine nor
human government. 5. Likewise this too:Where there is
neither divine nor human government, there is neither
God nor man. 6. Likewise this too:Where there is neither
God nor man, there is nothing except perhaps the
devil. 7.Hence it is that the Antinomians, the enemies of
the Law, evidently are either devils themselves or the
brothers of the devil. 8. It avails the Antinomians nothing
to boast that they teach very much of God, Christ,
grace, Law, etc. 10. This confession of the Antinomians
is like the one when the devils cried: 'Thou art the Son
of the living God,' [Luke 4, 34; 8, 28.] 12. Whoever
denies that the damning Law must be taught in reality
simply denies the Law. 14. A law which does not damn
is an imagined and painted law as the chimera or tragelaphus.
15. Nor is the political or natural law anything
unless it damns and terrifies sinners Rom. 13, 1. 5; 1 Pet.
2, 13ff. 17.What the Antinomians say concerning God,
Christ, faith, Law, grace, etc., they say without any
meaning as the parrot says its 'cai're, Good day!' 18.
Hence it is impossible to learn theology or civil polity
(theologiam aut politiam) from the Antinomians. 19.
Therefore they must be avoided as most pestilential
teachers of licentious living who permit the perpetration
of all crimes. 20. For they serve not Christ, but their
own belly [Rom. 16, {{< hiddenanchor 18 >}}18{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, and, madmen that they are,
seek to please men, in order that from them, as a man's
judgment, they may gain glory." (Drews, 613; St. L. 20,
1647; E. 4, 441.)-Regarding Luther's disputations
against the Antinomians Planck pertinently remarks
that they compel admiration for his clear and penetrating
mind, and rank among the very best of his writings.
(1, 18; Frank 2, 311.)

#### 192."Grickel"Remained Grickel.

At the instance of Elector Joachim, negotiations
were begun with Luther, which finally led to a sort of
peaceful settlement. Agricola was required to send
(which he also did) a revocation to the preachers, the
council, and the congregation at Eisleben.However, the
new and enlarged edition (1541) of the catechism
which Agricola had published in 1527 revealed the fact
that also this last recantation was insincere; for in it he
repeated his antinomistic teaching, though not in the
original defiant manner. Little wonder, then, that
despite the formal settlement, cordial relations were not
restored between Luther and Agricola.When the latter
visited Wittenberg in 1545, Luther refused to see the
man whom he regarded incurably dishonest. "Grickel,"
said he,"will remain Grickel to all eternity Grickel wird
in alle Ewigkeit Grickel bleiben." And "Grickel" he did
remain; for in 1565 he published a sermon in which he
said: "Every one who is to be appointed as teacher and
preacher shall be asked:What do you intend to teach in
the church? He shall answer:The Gospel of Jesus Christ.
But when further asked:What does the Gospel preach?
he shall answer: The Gospel preaches repentance and
forgiveness of sins."Considering this a further evidence
that Agricola still adhered to, and was now ready once
more to champion, his old errors, the preachers of
Mansfeld registered their protest in a publication of the
same year. A controversy, however, did not materialize,
for Agricola died the following year. (Planck 5, 1, 47;
Frank 2, 267.)

#### 193. False Propositions of Agricola.

Following are some of Agricola's radical statements
concerning the Law and the Gospel. The first thesis of
his Positions of 1537 reads: "Repentance is to be taught
not from the Decalog or from any law of Moses, but
from the violation of the Son through the Gospel.
Poenitentia docenda est non ex decalogo aut ulla lege
Mosis, sed ex violatione Filii per evangelium." (E. 4. 420.)
Thesis 13:"In order to keep the Christian doctrine pure,
we must resist those [Luther and Melanchthon] who
teach that the Gospel must be preached only to such
whose hearts have previously been terrified and broken
by the Law. Quare pro conservanda puritate doctrinae
resistendum est iis, qui docent, evangelium non praedicandum
nisi animis prius quassatis et contritis per legem."
(421.) Thesis 16:"The Law merely rebukes sin, and that,
too,without the Holy Spirit; hence it rebukes to damnation."
Thesis 17: "But there is need of a doctrine which
does not only condemn with great efficacy, but which
saves at the same time; this, however, is the Gospel, a
doctrine which teaches conjointly repentance and
remission of sins." (421.) In his Brief Summary of the
Gospel, Agricola says: "In the New Testament and
among Christians or in the Gospel we must not preach
the violation of the Law when a man breaks or transgresses
the Law, but the violation of the Son, to wit that
he who does not for the sake of the kingdom of heaven
willingly omit what he should omit, and does not do
what he should do, crucifies Christ anew." (St. L. 20,
1622ff.; Frank 2, 313, Gieseler 3, 2, 137; Pieper, Dogm.
3,265ff.)

A commingling of the Law and Gospel always
results in a corruption of the doctrines of conversion,
faith, and justification. Such was the case also with
respect to Agricola, who taught that justification follows
a contrition which flows from,and hence is preceded by,
love toward God. Turning matters topsy-turvy, he
taught : Repentance consists in this, that the heart of
man,experiencing the kindness of God which calls us to
Christ and presents us with His grace, turns about,
apprehends God's grace, thanks Him heartily for having
spared it so graciously, begins to repent, and to grieve
heartily and sorrowfully on account of its sins,wishes to
abstain from them, and renounces its former sinful life.
"This," says Agricola, "is repentance (poenitentia,
Buessen) and the first stage of the new birth, the true
breathing and afflation of the Holy Spirit. After this he
acquires a hearty confidence in God, believing that He
will condone his folly and not blame him for it, since he
did not know any better, although he is much ashamed
of it and wishes that it had never happened; he also
resolves, since he has fared so well,never to sin any more
or to do anything that might make him unworthy of the
benefit received as if he were ungrateful and forgetful;
he furthermore learns to work out, confirm, and preserve
his salvation in fear and trembling ... this is forgiveness
of sins." (Frank 2, 247.) These confused ideas
plainly show that Agricola had a false conception, not
only of the Law and Gospel, but also of original sin,
repentance, faith, regeneration, and justification.
Essentially, his was the Roman doctrine, which makes
an antecedent of what in reality is an effect and a consequence
of conversion and justification. Viewed from
this angle, it occasions little surprise that Agricola consented
to help formulate and introduce the Augsburg
Interim in which the essentials of Lutheranism were
denied.

#### 194. Poach, Otto, Musculus, Neander.

The antinomistic doctrines rejected, in particular,
by Article VI of the Formula of Concord,were represented
chiefly by Andrew Poach, Anton Otto, Andrew
Musculus, and Michael Neander. Poach, born 1516,
studied under Luther and was an opponent of the
Philippists, he became pastor in Halle in 1541; in
Nordhausen, 1547; in Erfurt, 1550; Uttenbach, near
Jena, 1572, where he died 1585. At Erfurt, Poach was
deposed in 1572 on account of dissensions due to the
antinomistic controversies. He signed the Book of
Concord.-Otto [Otho; also called Herzberger, because
he was born in Herzberg, {{< hiddenanchor 1505 >}}1505{{< /hiddenanchor >}} studied under Luther;
served as pastor in Graefenthal, and from 1543 in
Nordhausen where he was deposed in 1568 for adherence
to Flacius. However, when Otto, while antagonizing
Majorism and synergism, in sermons on the Letter
to the Galatians of 1565 rejected the Third Use of the
Law, he was opposed also by Flacius, who reminded
him of the fact that here on earth the new man resembles
a child, aye, an embryo, rather than a full-fledged
man.

In his zealous opposition to the Majorists, Andrew
Musculus (Meusel, born 1514; studied at Leipzig 1532 ;
1538, then at Wittenberg; became a zealous and passionate
adherent of Luther, whom he considered the
greatest man since the days of the apostles; from 1540
till his death, September 29, 1581, professor and pastor,
later on, General Superintendent, in Frankfurt-on-the-
Oder) also made some extreme statements. Later on,
however, he cooperated in preparing and revising the
Formula of Concord.Musculus wrote of Luther: "There
is as great a difference between the dear old teachers and
Luther as there is between the light of the sun and that
of the moon; and beyond all doubt, the ancient fathers,
even the best and foremost among them, as Hilary and
Augustine, had they lived contemporaneously with
him, would not have hesitated to deliver the lamp to
him, as the saying is." (Meusel, Handl. 4, 709; Richard,
450.)

The most prominent opponents of these
Antinomians were the well-known theologians
Moerlin, Flacius,Wigand, and Westphal (chiefly in letters
to Poach) . The controversy was carried on with
moderation, and without any special efforts to cause
trouble among the people. The main issue was not-as
in the conflict with Agricola-whether the Law is necessary
in order to effect contrition and prepare men for
the Gospel, but the so-called Third Use of the Law (tertius
usus legis), i.e., whether the Law is, and is intended
to be, of service to Christians after their regeneration; in
particular, whether the regenerate still need the Law
with respect to their new obedience.

The conflict with Poach arose from the Majoristic
controversy. Dealing in particular with the aberrations
of Menius, the Synod at Eisenach, 1556, adopted seven
theses which Menius was required to subscribe. The
first declared: "Although the proposition, Good works
are necessary to salvation, may be tolerated hypothetically
and in an abstract way in the doctrine of the Law
(in doctrina legis abstractive et de idea tolerari potest),
nevertheless there are many weighty reasons why it
ought and should be avoided no less than this one:
Christ is a creature." (Preger 1, 383.) While Flacius,
Wigand, and Moerlin defended the thesis, Amsdorf
(who first, too, adopted it, but later on withdrew his
assent; Seeberg 4, 488), Aurifaber, and especially Poach
rejected it. This marked the beginning of the so-called
Second Antinomistic Controversy. Poach denied that
the Law has any promise of salvation. Even the most
perfect fulfilment of the Law, said he, is but the fulfilment
of a duty which merits no reward. The only thing
one may acquire by a perfect fulfilment is freedom from
guilt and punishment. Fulfilment of our duty (solutio
debiti) does not warrant any claim on salvation. Yet
Poach was careful to declare that this did not apply to
the fulfilment of the Law which Christ rendered for us.
Why? Poach answered: Because Christ, being the Son of
God, was not obliged to fulfil the Law.When, therefore,
He did fulfil it in our stead,He rendered satisfaction to
divine justice, so that righteousness can now be imputed
to us and we become partakers of eternal life.

Poach wrote: "It would not be correct to say: In the
doctrine of the Law all the works commanded in the
Law are necessary to salvation. In doctrina legis omnia
opera mandata in lege sunt necessaria ad salutem."
(Schluesselburg 4, 343.) Again: "The works of Christ,
which are the fulfilment of the Law, are the merit of our
salvation. Our works, which ought to have been the fulfilment
of the Law, do not merit salvation, even though
they were most perfect, as the Law requires,-which,
however, is impossible. The reason is that we are debtors
to the Law. Christ, however, is not a debtor to the Law.
Even if we most perfectly fulfilled all the commandments
of God and completely satisfied the righteousness
of God, we would not be worthy of grace and salvation
on that account, nor would God be obliged to
give us grace and salvation as a debt.He justly demands
the fulfilment ofHis Law from us as obedience due Him
from His creature, which is bound to obey its Creator.
Etiamsi nos omnia mandata Dei perfectissime impleremus
et iustitiae Dei penitus satisfaceremus, tamen non
ideo digni essemus gratia et salute, nec Deus obligatus
esset, ut nobis gratiam et salutem daret ex debito. Sed iure
requirit impletionem legis suae a nobis, ut debitam obedientiam
a sua creatura, quae conditori suo obedire tenetur."
(274.) Again:"The Law has not the necessity of salvation,
but the necessity of obligation (non habet lex
necessitatem salutis, sed necessitatem debiti). For, as said,
even though a man would most perfectly do the works
of the Law, he would not obtain salvation on account of
these works. Nor is God under obligation to man, but
man is under obligation to God. And in the Law God
requires of man the obedience he owes; He does not
require an obedience with the promise of salvation."
(276.)

As to Otto, he distinguished, in a series of Latin theses
a double office of the Law, the ecclesiastical; and
political-officium ecclesiasticum and officium
politicum. The former is to give knowledge of sin; the
latter, to coerce the old man and maintain order among
the obstinate.He denied that the Law in any way serves
Christians with respect to good works. Otto declared:
"The Law is useful and necessary neither for justification
nor for any good works. But faith in Christ the
Mediator alone is useful and necessary both for justification
and the good works themselves. Lex enim non
modo ad iustificationem sed neque ad ulla bona opera
utilis et necessaria est. Sed sola fides in Christum mediatorem
utilis et necessaria est tam ad iustificationem quam
ad ipsa bona opera."Quoting Luther, he said:"The highest
art of Christians is to know nothing of the Law, to
ignore works. Summa ars Christianorum est nescire
legem, ignorare opera," i.e., in the article of justification,
as Otto did not fail to add by way of explanation.
(Luther, Weimar 40, 1, 43; Tschackert, 485.) Seeberg
remarks that in reality, Poach and Otto were merely
opposed to such an interpretation of the Third Use of
the Law as made the Law a motive of good works, and
hence could not be charged with antinomianism proper.
(4, 488f.)

Planck, Frank, and other historians have fathered
upon Otto also a series of radical German theses, which,
however, were composed, not by Otto, but probably by
some of his adherents. These theses, in which all of the
errors of Agricola are revamped, were discussed at the
Altenburg colloquy, 1568 to 1569; their author, however,
was not mentioned.We submit the following:"1.The
Law does not teach good works, nor should it be
preached in order that we may do good works. 3.Moses
knew nothing of our faith and religion. 5. Evangelical
preachers are to preach the Gospel only, and no Law. 7.
A Christian who believes should do absolutely nothing,
neither what is good nor what is evil. 10.We should pray
God that we may remain steadfast in faith till our end,
without all works. 14. The Holy Spirit does not work
according to the norm or rule of the Law, but by
Himself,without the assistance of the Law. 16. A believing
Christian is supra omnem obedientiam, above all
Law and all obedience. 17. The rebuking sermons of the
prophets do not at all pertain to Christians. 21. The Law,
good works, and new obedience have no place in the
kingdom of Christ, but in the world just as Moses and
the government of the Pope. 25. The Law has no place
in the Church or in the pulpit, but in the court-house
(Rathaus). 28. The Third Use of the Law is a blasphemy
in theology and a monstrosity in the realm of nature
(portentum in rerum natura) . 29.No man can be saved
if the Third Use of the Law is true and is to be taught in
the Church. The Holy Spirit in man knows nothing of
the Law; the flesh, however, is betimes in need of the
Law." (Tschackert, 485; Planck 5, 1, 62.) Frank also
quotes: "The Christians or the regenerate are deified
(vergoettert); yea, they are themselves God and cannot
sin. God has not given you His Word that you should be
saved thereby (dass du dadurch sollst selig werden); and
whoever seeks no more from God than salvation
(Seligkeit) seeks just as much as a louse in a scab. Such
Christians are the devil's own, together with all their
good works." (2, 326. 275.)

Also Musculus is numbered among the theologians
who were not always sufficiently discreet and guarded
in their statements concerning the necessity of good
works and the use of the Law. All expressions of the
Apostle Paul regarding the spiritual use of the Law, said
Musculus,must be understood as referring to such only
as are to be justified, not to those who are justified (de
iustificandis, non de iustificatis). But he added: "For
these, in as far as they remain in Christ, are far outside
of and above every law. Hi enim, quatenus in Christo
manent, longe extra et supra omnem legem sunt."
(Tschackert. 486.)

Michael Neander of Ilfeld, a friend of Otto was also
suspected of antinomianism. He denied that there is
any relation whatever between the Law and a regenerate
Christian. But he, too, was careful enough to add: "in as
far as he is just or lives by the spirit, quatenus est iustus
seu spiritu vivit." In a letter, Neander said: "I adhere to
the opinion that the Law is not given to the just in any
use or office whatsoever, in so far as he is just or lives by
the spirit ... 'For the Law,' as Luther says in his marginal
note to Jeremiah, chap. 31, 'is no longer over us, but
under us, and does not surround us any more.' Love
rules and governs all laws, and frequently something is
true according to the Law, but false according to love
(saepeque aliquid lege verum, dilectione tamen falsum
est). For love is the statute, measure, norm, and rule of
all things on earth ... The Law only accuses and damns,
and apart from this it has no other use or office, i.e., the
Law remains the norm of good works to all eternity, also
in hell after the Last Day, but for the unjust and reprobate,
and for the flesh in every man. To the just, regenerated,
and new man, however, it is not the norm of
good works, i.e., the Law does not govern, regulate, and
teach the just man; i.e., it is not active with respect to
him as it is with respect to an unjust man, but is rather
regulated and governed and taught by the just man. It
no longer drives the just (as it did before conversion and
as it still drives the flesh), but is now driven and suffers,
since as just men we are no longer under the Law, but
above the Law and lords of the Law.How, therefore, can
the Law be a norm to the just man when he is the lord
of the Law, commands the Law, and frequently does
what is contrary to the Law (cum iustus legis sit dominus,
legi imperet et saepe legi contraria faciat)? ...When the
just man meditates in the Law of the Lord day and
night, when he establishes the Law by faith, when he
loves the Law and admires the inexhaustible wisdom of
the divine Law, when he does good works written and
prescribed in the Law (as indeed he alone can), when he
uses the Law aright,-all these are neither the third, nor
the fourth, nor the twelfth, nor the fiftieth use or office
of the Law, ... but fruits of faith, of the Spirit, or regeneration
...But the Old Man, who is not yet new, or a part
of him which is not as yet regenerated, has need of this
Law, and he is to be commanded:'Put on the new man;
put off the old.'"(Schluesselburg 4, 61; Tschackert, 484.)

#### 195.Melanchthon and the Philippists.

A further controversy concerning the proper distinction
between the Law and the Gospel was caused by
the Philippists in Wittenberg whose teaching was somewhat
akin to that of Agricola.They held that the Gospel,
in the narrow sense of the term, and as distinguished
from the Law, is "the most powerful preaching of repentance."
(Frank 2, 327.) Taking his cue from Luther,
Melanchthon, in his Loci of 1621 as well as in later writings,
clearly distinguished between Law and Gospel. (C.
R. 21, 139; 23, 49, 12, 576.) True, he had taught, also in
the Apology, that, in the wider sense, the Gospel is both
a preaching of repentance and forgiveness of sin. But
this, as the Formula of Concord explains, was perfectly
correct and in keeping with the Scriptures.However, in
repeating the statement that the Gospel embraces both
the preaching of repentance and forgiveness of sins,
Melanchthon was not always sufficiently careful to preclude
misapprehension and misunderstanding. Indeed,
some of the statements he made after Luther's death are
misleading, and did not escape the challenge of loyal
Lutherans.

During a disputation in 1548, at which
Melanchthon presided, Flacius criticized the unqualified
assertion that the Gospel was a preaching of repentance,
but was satisfied when Melanchthon explained
that the term Gospel was here used in the wider sense,
as comprising the entire doctrine of Christ. However,
when Melanchthon, during another disputation, 1556,
declared: The ministry of the Gospel "rebukes the other
sins which the Law shows, as well as the saddest of sins
which is revealed by the Gospel (hoc tristissimum peccatum,
quod in Evangelio ostenditur), viz., that the world
ignores and despises the Son of God." Flacius considered
it his plain duty to register a public protest. It was a
teaching which was, at least in part, the same error that
Luther, and formerly also Melanchthon himself, had
denounced when espoused by Agricola, viz., that genuine
contrition is wrought, not by the Law, but by the
Gospel; by the preaching, not of the violation of the
Law, but of the violation of the Son. (C. R. 12, 634. 640.)

These misleading statements of Melanchthon were
religiously cultivated and zealously defended by the
Wittenberg Philippists. With a good deal of animosity
they emphasized that the Gospel in its most proper
sense is also a preaching of repentance (praedicatio
poenitentiae, Busspredigt), inasmuch as it revealed the
baseness of sin and the greatness of its offense against
God, and, in particular, inasmuch as the Gospel alone
uncovered, rebuked, and condemned the hidden sin
(arcanum peccatum) and the chief sin of all, the sin of
unbelief (incredulitas et neglectio Filii), which alone condemns
a man. These views, which evidently involved a
commingling of the Law and the Gospel,were set forth
by Paul Crell in his Disputation against John Wigand,
1571, and were defended in the Propositions Concerning
the Chief Controversies of These Times (also of 1571), by
Pezel and other Wittenberg theologians. (Frank 2, 277.
323.) As a consequence, the Philippists, too, were
charged with antinomianism, and were strenuously
opposed by such theologians as Flacius, Amsdorf, and
Wigand. Wigand attacked the Wittenberg Propositions
in his book of 1571, Concerning Antinomianism, Old
and New. Pezel answered in his Apology of the True
Doctrine on the Definition of the Gospel, 1571; and Paul
Crell, in Spongia, or 150 Propositions Concerning the
Definition of the Gospel, Opposed to the Stupid
Accusation of John Wigand, 1571. The teaching of the
Philippists was formulated by Paul Crell as follows:
"Since this greatest and chief sin [unbelief] is revealed,
rebuked, and condemned by the Gospel alone, therefore
also the Gospel alone is expressly and particularly, truly
and properly, a preaching and a voice of repentance or
conversion in its true and proper sense. A solo evangelio,
cum peccatum hoc summum et praecipuum monstretur,
arguatur et damnetur expresse ac nominatim solum
etiam evangelium vere ac proprie praedicatio ac vox est
poenitentiae sive conversionis vere et proprie ita dictae."
(277. 327.)

This doctrine of the Philippists, according to which
the Gospel in the narrow and proper sense, and as distinguished
from the Law, is a preaching of repentance,
was rejected by Article V of the Formula of Concord as
follows: "But if the Law and the Gospel, likewise also
Moses himself as a teacher of the Law and Christ as a
preacher of the Gospel, are contrasted with one another,
we believe, teach, and confess that the Gospel is not a
preaching of repentance or reproof, but properly nothing
else than a preaching of consolation, and a joyful
message which does not reprove or terrify, but comforts
consciences against the terrors of the Law, points alone
to the merit of Christ, and raises them up again by the
lovely preaching of the grace and favor of God,obtained
through Christ's merit." (803, 7.)

