---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XVIII. The Crypto-Calvinistic Controversy.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 18
---

#### 196.Contents and Purpose of Articles VII and VIII.

In all of its articles the Formula of Concord is but a
reafflrmation of the doctrines taught and defended by
Luther. The fire of prolonged and hot controversies
through which these doctrines passed after his death
had but strengthened the Lutherans in their conviction
that in every point Luther's teaching was indeed nothing
but the pure Word of God itself. It had increased the
consciousness that, in believing and teaching as they
did, they were not following mere human authorities,
such as Luther and the Lutheran Confessions, but the
Holy Scriptures, by which alone their consciences were
bound.Articles VII and VIII of the Formula of Concord,
too, reassert Luther's doctrines on the Lord's Supper
and the person of Christ as being in every particular the
clear and unmistakable teaching of the divine Word,-
two doctrines,by the way, which perhaps more than any
other serve as the acid test whether the fundamental
attitude of a church or a theologian is truly Scriptural
and fully free from every rationalistic and enthusiastic
infection.

The Seventh Article teaches the real and substantial
presence of the true body and blood of Christ; their
sacramental union in, with, and under the elements of
bread and wine; the oral manducation or eating and
drinking of both substances by unbelieving as well as
believing communicants. It maintains that this presence
of the body and blood of Christ, though real, is neither
an impanation nor a companation, neither a local
inclusion nor a mixture of the two substances, but illocal
and transcendent. It holds that the eating of the body
and the drinking of the blood of Christ, though truly
done with the mouth of the body, is not Capernaitic, or
natural, but supernatural. It affirms that this real presence
is effected, not by any human power, but by the
omnipotent power of Christ in accordance with the
words of the institution of the Sacrament.

The Eighth Article treats of the person of Christ, of
the personal union of His two natures, of the communication
of these natures as well as of their attributes,
and, in particular, of the impartation of the truly divine
majesty to His human nature and the terminology
resulting therefrom. One particular object of Article
VIII is also to show that the doctrine of the real presence
of the body and blood of Christ in the Holy Supper, as
taught by the Lutheran Church, does not, as was contended
by her Zwinglian and Calvinistic adversaries,
conflict in any way with what the Scriptures teach concerning
the person of Christ, His human nature, His
ascension, and His sitting at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty. The so-called Appendix, or Catalogus,
a collection of passages from the Bible and from the
fathers of the ancient Church, prepared by Andreae and
Chemnitz was added to the Formula of Concord
(though not as an authoritative part of it) in further
support of the Lutheran doctrine particularly concerning
the divine majesty of the human nature of Christ.

Both articles, the seventh as well as the eighth, were
incorporated in the Formula of Concord in order thoroughly
to purify the Lutheran Church from Reformed
errors concerning the Lord's Supper and the person of
Christ, which after Luther's death had wormed their
way into some of her schools and churches, especially
those of Electoral Saxony, and to make her forever
immune against the infection of Calvinism (Crypto-
Calvinism)-a term which, during the controversies
preceding the Formula of Concord did not, as is generally
the case to-day, refer to Calvin's absolute decree of
election and reprobation, but to his doctrine concerning
the Lord's Supper, as formulated by himself in the
Consensus Tigurinus (Zurich Consensus), issued 1549.
The subtitle of this confession reads:"Consensio Mutua
in Re Sacramentaria Ministrorum Tigurinae Ecclesiae,
et D. Iohannis Calvini Ministri Genevensis Ecclesiae,
iam nunc ab ipsis autoribus edita." In this confession,
therefore,Calvin declares his agreement with the teaching
of Zwingli as represented by his followers in Zurich,
notably Bullinger. Strenuous efforts were made by the
Calvinists and Reformed everywhere to make the
Consensus Tigurinus the basis of a pan-Protestant
union, and at the same time the banner under which to
conquer all Protestant countries, Lutheran Germany
included, for what must be regarded as being essentially
Zwinglianism. The Consensus was adopted in
Switzerland,England,France, and Holland. In Lutheran
territories, too, its teaching was rapidly gaining friends,
notably in Southern Germany, where Bucer had prepared
the way for it, and in Electoral Saxony where the
Philippists offered no resistance. Garnished as it was
with glittering and seemingly orthodox phrases, the
Consensus Tigurinus lent itself admirably for such
Reformed propaganda."The consequence was,"says the
Formula of Concord, "that many great men were
deceived by these fine, plausible words-splendidis et
magnificis verbis."(973, 6.) To counteract this deception,
to establish Luther's doctrine of the real presence of the
body and blood of Christ, and to defend it against the
sophistries of the Sacramentarians: Zwinglians,
Calvinists, and Crypto-Calvinists-such was the object
of Articles VII and VIII of the Formula of Concord.

#### 197. John Calvin.

Calvin was born July 10, 1509, in Noyon, France.
He began his studies in Paris, 1523 preparing for theology.
In 1529 his father induced him to take up law in
Orleans and Bourges. In 1531 he returned to his theological
studies in Paris. Here he experienced what he
himself describes as a "sudden conversion." He joined
the Reformed congregation, and before long was its
acknowledged leader. In 1533 he was compelled to leave
France because of his anti-Roman testimony. In Basel,
1535, he wrote the first draft of his Institutio Religionis
Christianae. In Geneva where he was constrained to
remain by William Farel [born 1489; active as a fiery
Protestant preacher in Meaux, Strassburg,Zurich, Bern,
Basel, Moempelgard, Geneva, Metz, etc.; died {{< hiddenanchor 1565 >}}1565{{< /hiddenanchor >}},
Calvin developed and endeavored to put into practise
his legalistic ideal of a theocratic and rigorous puritanical
government. As a result he was banished, 1538. He
removed to Strassburg,where he was held and engaged
by Bucer. He attended the conventions in Frankfort,
1539; Hagenau, 1540; Worms, 1540; and Regensburg,
1541. Here he got acquainted with the Lutherans
notably Melanchthon. September 13, 1541, he returned
to Geneva,where,woefully mixing State and Church,he
continued his reformatory and puritanical efforts. One
of the victims of his theocratic government was the
anti-Trinitarian Michael Servetus, who, at the instance
of Calvin, was burned at the stake, October 27, 1553. In
1559 Calvin established the Geneva School, which exercised
a far-reaching theological influence. He died May
27, 1564.

Calvin repeatedly expressed his unbounded admiration
for Luther as a "preeminent servant of Christ-
praeclarus Christi servus." (C. R. 37, 54.) In his Answer of
1543 against the Romanist Pighius he said:"Concerning
Luther we testify without dissimulation now as heretofore
that we esteem him as a distinguished apostle of
Christ, by whose labor and service, above all, the purity
of the Gospel has been restored at this time.De Luthero
nunc quoque sicut hactenus non dissimulanter testamur,
eum nos habere pro insigni Christi apostolo, cuius
maxime opera et ministerio restituta hoc tempore fuerit
Evangelii puritas." (Gieseler 3, 2, 169.) Even after Luther
had published his Brief Confession, in which he unsparingly
denounces the Sacramentarians (deniers of the
real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Lord's
Supper), and severs all connection with them Calvin
admonished Bullinger in a letter dated November 25,
1544, to bear in mind what a great and wonderfully gifted
man Luther was, and with what fortitude, ability,and
powerful teaching he had shattered the kingdom of
Antichrist and propagated the salutary doctrine. "I am
frequently accustomed to say," he declared,"that, even if
he should call me a devil I would accord him the honor
of acknowledging him to be an eminent servant of
God." In the original the remarkable words of Calvin
read as follows: "Sed haec cupio vobis in mentem venire,
primum quantus sit vir Lutherus, et quantis dotibus excellat,
quanta animi fortitudine et constantia quanta dexteritate,
quanta doctrinae efficacia hactenus ad profligandum
Antichristi regnum et simul propagandam salutis
doctrinam incubuerit. Saepe dicere solitus sum, etiamsi
me diabolum vocaret, me tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum,
ut insignem Dei servum agnoscam, qui tamen, ut
pollet eximiis virtutibus, ita magnis vitiis laboret."
(Gieseler 3, 2, 169; C. R. 39 [Calvini Opp. {{< hiddenanchor 11 >}}11{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 774.)

However, though he admired the personality of
Luther, Calvin, like Zwingli and Oecolampadius at
Marburg 1529, revealed a theological spirit which was
altogether different from Luther's. In particular, he was
violently opposed to Luther's doctrines of the real presence
in the Lord's Supper and of the majesty of the
human nature of Christ. Revealing his animus, Calvin
branded the staunch and earnest defenders of these
doctrines as the "apes" of Luther. In his Second Defense
against Westphal, 1556, he exclaimed: "O Luther, how
few imitators of your excellences, but how many apes of
your pious ostentation have you left behind! O Luthere,
quam paucos tuae praestantiae imitatores, quam multas
vero sanctae tuae iactantiae simias reliquisti!" (Gieseler 3,
2, 209.)

True, when in Strassburg, Calvin signed the
Augsburg Confession (1539 or 1540), and was generally
considered a Lutheran.However, in his Last Admonition
to Westphal, of 1557 and in a letter of the same year to
Martin Schalling,Calvin wrote:"Nor do I repudiate the
Augsburg Confession, to which I have previously subscribed,
in the sense in which the author himself
[Melanchthon in the Variata of {{< hiddenanchor 1540 >}}1540{{< /hiddenanchor >}} has interpreted it.
Nec vero Augustanam Confessionem repudio, cui pridem
volens ac libens subscripsi, sicut eam auctor ipse interpretatus
est." (C. R. 37, 148.) According to his own confession,
therefore, Calvin's subscription to the Augustana,
at least as far as the article of the Lord's Supper is concerned,
was insincere and nugatory. In fact Calvin must
be regarded as the real originator of the second controversy
on the Lord's Supper between the Lutherans and
the Reformed, even as the first conflict on this question
was begun, not by Luther, but by his opponents,
Carlstadt, Zwingli, and Oecolampadius. For the adoption
of the Consensus Tigurinus in 1549, referred to
above, cannot but be viewed as an overt act by which
the Wittenberg Concord, signed 1536 by representative
Lutheran and Reformed theologians, was publicly repudiated
and abandoned by Calvin and his adherents, and
whereby an anti-Lutheran propaganda on an essentially
Zwinglian basis was inaugurated. Calvin confirmed
the schism between the Lutherans and the Reformed
which Carlstadt,Zwingli, and Oecolampadius had originated.

#### 198. Calvin's Zwinglianism.

The doctrine of Calvin and his adherents concerning
the Lord's Supper is frequently characterized as a
materially modified Zwinglianism. Schaff maintains
that "Calvin's theory took a middle course, retaining, on
the basis of Zwingli's exegesis, the religious substance of
Luther's faith, and giving it a more intellectual and spiritual
form, triumphed in Switzerland, gained much
favor in Germany and opened a fair prospect for
union." (Creeds 1, 280.) As a matter of fact, however, a
fact admitted also by such Calvinists as Hodge and
Shedd, Calvin's doctrine was a denial in toto of the real
presence as taught by Luther. (Pieper, Dogm. 3, 354.)
Calvin held that after His ascension Christ, according to
His human nature, was locally enclosed in heaven, far
away from the earth.Hence he denied also the real presence
of Christ's body and blood in the Holy Supper. In
fact, Calvin's doctrine was nothing but a polished form
of Zwingli's crude teaching, couched in phrases
approaching the Lutheran terminology as closely as
possible. Even where he paraded as Luther, Calvin was
but Zwingli disguised (and poorly at that) in a seemingly
orthodox garb and promenading with several imitation
Lutheran feathers in his hat.

In the _Formula of Concord_ we read: "Although some
Sacramentarians strive to employ words that come as
close as possible to the Augsburg Confession and the
form and mode of speech in its churches, and confess
that in the Holy Supper the body of Christ is truly
received by believers, still, when we insist that they state
their meaning properly, sincerely, and clearly, they all
declare themselves unanimously thus: that the true
essential body and blood of Christ is absent from the
consecrated bread and wine in the Holy Supper as far as
the highest heaven is from the earth ... Therefore they
understand this presence of the body of Christ not as a
presence here upon earth, but only respectu fidei; (with
respect to faith), that is, that our faith, reminded and
excited by the visible signs, just as by the Word
preached, elevates itself and ascends above all heavens,
and receives and enjoys the body of Christ, which is
there in heaven present, yea, Christ Himself, together
with all His benefits, in a manner true and essential, but
nevertheless spiritual only; ... consequently nothing else
is received by the mouth in the Holy Supper than bread
and wine." (971, 2f.) This is, and was intended to be, a
presentation of Calvinism as being nothing but
Zwinglianism clothed in seemingly orthodox phrases.

That this picture drawn by the Formula of Concord
is not a caricature or in any point a misrepresentation of
Calvinism appears from the Consensus Tigurinus itself,
where we read: "In as far as Christ is a man,He is to be
sought nowhere else than in heaven and in no other
manner than with the mind and the understanding of
faith. Therefore it is a perverse and impious superstition
to include Him under elements of this world. Christus,
quatenus homo est, non alibi quam in coelo nec aliter
quam mente et fidei intelligentia quaerendus est. Quare
perversa et impia superstitio est, ipsum sub elementis
huius mundi includere." Again: "We repudiate those
[who urge the literal interpretation of the words of
institution] as preposterous interpreters." "For beyond
controversy, they are to be taken figuratively, ... as when
by metonymy the name of the symbolized thing is
transferred to the sign-ut per metonymiam ad signum
transferatur rei figuratae nomen." Again: "Nor do we
regard it as less absurd to place Christ under, and to
unite Him with, the bread than to change the bread into
His body. Neque enim minus absurdum iudicamus,
Christum sub pane locare vel cum pane copulare, quam
panem transubstantiare in corpus eius." Again: "When
we say that Christ is to be sought in heaven this mode of
speech expresses a distance of place, ... because the body
of Christ, ... being finite and contained in heaven, as in
a place, must of necessity be removed from us by as
great a distance as the heaven is removed from the
earth-necesse est, a nobis tanto locorum intervallo
distare, quanto caelum abest a terra." (Niemeyer,
Collectio Confessionum, 196.) Such was the teaching
cunningly advocated by Calvin and his adherents the
Crypto-Calvinists in Germany included but boldly and
firmly opposed by the loyal Lutherans, and finally disposed
of by Articles VII and VIII of the Formula of
Concord.

#### 199.Melanchthon's Public Attitude.

As stated, Calvin's doctrine of the Lord's Supper
was received with increasing favor also in Lutheran territories,
notably in Southern Germany and Electoral
Saxony, where the number of theologians and laymen
who secretly adopted and began to spread it was rapidly
increasing; They were called Crypto-Calvinists (secret
or masked Calvinists) because, while they subscribed to
the Augsburg Confession, claimed to be loyal Lutherans,
and occupied most important positions in the Lutheran
Church, they in reality were propagandists of
Calvinism, zealously endeavoring to suppress Luther's
books and doctrines, and to substitute for them the
views of Calvin. Indeed, Calvin claimed both privately
and publicly that Melanchthon himself was his ally.
And, entirely apart from what the latter may privately
have confided to him, there can be little doubt that
Calvin's assertions were not altogether without foundation.
In fact, theologically as well as ethically,
Melanchthon must be regarded as the spiritual father
also of the Crypto-Calvinists.

True, originally Melanchthon fully shared Luther's
views on the Lord's Supper. At Marburg, 1529, he was
still violently opposed to the Zwinglians and their "profane"
teaching in an Opinion on Carlstadt's doctrine, of
October 9, 1625, he affirms that Christ, both as God and
man, i.e., with His body and blood is present in the
Supper. (C. R. 1, 760.) In September of the following
year he wrote to Philip Eberbach: "Know that Luther's
teaching [concerning the Lord's Supper] is very old in
the Church. Hoc scito, Lutheri sententiam perveterem in
ecclesia esse." (823.) This he repeats in a letter of
November 11, also to Eberbach. In an Opinion of May
15 1529: "I am satisfied that I shall not agree with the
Strassburgers all my life, and I know that Zwingli and
his compeers write falsely concerning the Sacrament."
(1067.) June 20 1529, to Jerome Baumgaertner: "I
would rather die than see our people become contaminated
by the society of the Zwinglian cause. Nam mori
malim, quam societate Cinglianae causae nostros contaminare.
My dear Jerome, it is a great cause, but few consider
it. I shall be lashed to death on account of this matter."
(C. R. 1, 1077; 2, 18.) November 2, 1529, to John
Fesel: "I admonish you most earnestly to avoid the
Zwinglian dogmas. Your Judimagister [Eberbach], I
fear, loves these profane disputations too much. I know
that the teaching of Zwingli can be upheld neither with
the Scriptures nor with the authority of the ancients.
Concerning the Lord's Supper, therefore, teach as
Luther does." (1, 1109.) In February, 1530, he wrote:
"The testimonies of ancient writers concerning the
Lord's Supper which I have compiled are now being
printed." (2, 18.) In this publication Melanchthon
endeavored to show by quotations from Cyril,
Chrysostom Vulgarius, Hilary, Cyprian, Irenaeus, and
Augustine that Zwingli's interpretation of the words of
institution does not agree with that of the ancient
Church. (23, 732.) According to his own statement,
Melanchthon embodied Luther's doctrine in the
Augsburg Confession and rejected that of the Zwinglians.
(2, 142. 212.)

At Augsburg, Melanchthon was much provoked
also when he heard that Bucer claimed to be in doctrinal
agreement with the Lutherans. In his Opinion
Concerning the Doctrine of the Sacramentarians,written
in August, 1530,we read:"1. The Zwinglians believe that
the body of the Lord can be present in but one place. 2.
Likewise that the body of Christ cannot be anywhere
except locally only. They vehemently contend that it is
contrary to the nature of a body to be anywhere in a
manner not local; also, that it is inconsistent with the
nature of a body to be in different places at the same
time. 3. For this reason they conclude that the body of
Christ is circumscribed in heaven in a certain place, so
that it can in no way be elsewhere at the same time and
that in truth and reality it is far away from the bread,
and not in the bread and with the bread. 4. Bucer is
therefore manifestly wrong in contending that they [the
Zwinglians] are in agreement with us. For we say that it
is not necessary for the body of Christ to be in but one
place.We say that it can be in different places, whether
this occurs locally or in some other secret way by which
different places are as one point present at the same time
to the person of Christ.We, therefore, affirm a true and
real presence of the body of Christ with the bread. 5. If
Bucer wishes to accept the opinion of Zwingli and
Oecolampadius, he will never dare to say that the body
of Christ is really with the bread without geometric distance.
9. Here they [the Zwinglians] wish the word
'presence' to be understood only concerning efficacy
and the Holy Spirit. 10.We, however, require not only
the presence of power, but of the body. This Bucer purposely
disguises. 11. They simply hold that the body of
Christ is in heaven, and that in reality it is neither with
the bread nor in the bread. 12.Nevertheless they say that
the body of Christ is truly present, but by contemplation
of faith, i.e., by imagination. 13. Such is simply their
opinion. They deceive men by saying that the body is
truly present, yet adding afterwards, 'by contemplation
of faith,' i.e., by imagination. 14.We teach that Christ's
body is truly and really present with the bread or in the
bread. 15. Although we say that the body of Christ is
really present,Luther does not say that it is present locally,
namely, in some mass, by circumscription; but in the
manner by which Christ's person or the entire Christ is
present to all creatures ... We deny transubstantiation,
and that the body is locally in the bread," etc. (2, 222.
311. 315.)

Such were the views of Melanchthon in and before
1530.And publicly and formally he continued to adhere
to Luther's teaching. In an Opinion written 1534, prior
to his convention with Bucer at Cassel, he said:"If Christ
were a mere creature and not God, He would not be
with us essentially, even if He had the government; but
since He is God, He gives His body as a testimony that
He is essentially with us always. This sense of the
Sacrament is both simple and comforting ... Therefore I
conclude that Christ's body and blood are truly with the
bread and wine, that is to say, Christ essentially, not figuratively.
But here we must cast aside the thoughts proffered
by reason, viz., how Christ ascends and descends,
hides Himself in the bread, and is nowhere else." (2.
801.) In 1536 Melanchthon signed the Wittenberg
Concord, which plainly taught that the body and blood
of Christ are received also by unworthy guests. (CONC.
TRIGL. 977, 12ff.) In 1537 he subscribed to the Smalcald
Articles, in which Luther brought out his doctrine of the
real presence in most unequivocal terms, declaring that
"bread and wine in the Supper are the true body and
blood of Christ, and are given and received not only by
the godly, but also by wicked Christians." (CONC. TRIGL.
493, 1.) In his letter to Flacius of September 5, 1556,
Melanchthon solemnly declared: "I have never changed
the doctrine of the Confession." (C. R. 8 841.)
September 6, 1557, he wrote:"We all embrace and retain
the Confession together with the Apology and the confession
of Luther written previous to the Synod at
Mantua."(9, 260.) Again, in November of the same year:
"Regarding the Lord's Supper, we retain the Augsburg
Confession and Apology." (9, 371.) In an Opinion of
March 4, 1558,Melanchthon declared that in the Holy
Supper the Son of God is truly and substantially present
in such a manner that when we use it,"He gives us with
the bread and wine His body," etc., and that Zwingli was
wrong when he declared "that it is a mere outward sign,
and that Christ is not essentially present in it, and that it
is a mere sign by which Christians know each other." (9,
472f.) Several months before his death, in his preface to
the Corpus Philippicum, Melanchthon declared that in
the Holy Supper "Christ is truly and substantially present
and truly administered to those who take the body
and blood of Christ," and that in it "He gives His body
and blood to him who eats and drinks." (Richard. 389.)

#### 200.Melanchthon's Private Views.

While Melanchthon in a public and formal way,
continued, in the manner indicated, to maintain orthodox
appearances till his death, he had inwardly and in
reality since 1530 come to be more and more of a
stranger to Luther's firmness of conviction, also with
respect to the doctrine of the Lord's Supper. Influenced
by an undue respect for the authority of the ancient
fathers and misled by his reason or, as Luther put it, by
his philosophy, he gradually lost his firm hold on the
clear words of the institution of the Holy Supper. As a
result he became a wavering reed,driven to and fro with
the wind, now verging toward Luther, now toward
Calvin. Always oscillating between truth and error, he
was unable to rise to the certainty of firm doctrinal conviction,
and the immovable stand which characterized
Luther. In a letter dated May 24, 1538, in which he
revealed the torments of his distracted and doubting
soul, he wrote to Veit Dietrich: "Know that for ten years
neither a night nor a day has passed in which I did not
reflect on this matter," the Lord's Supper. (C. R. 3, 537.)
And his doubts led to a departure from his own former
position,-a fact for which also sufficient evidences are
not wholly lacking. "Already in 1531," says Seeberg,
"Melanchthon secretly expressed his opinion plainly
enough to the effect that it was sufficient to acknowledge
a presence of the divinity of Christ in the Lord's
Supper, but not a union of the body and the bread. Ep.,
p. 85." (Dogg. 4, 2, 447.)

That Melanchthon's later public statements and
protestations concerning his faithful adherence to the
doctrine of the Augsburg Confession must be more or
less discounted, appears, apart from other considerations,
from his own admission that he was wont to dissimulate
in these and other matters; from his private letters,
in which he favorably refers to the symbolical interpretation
of the words of institution; from his communication
to Philip of Hesse with regard to Luther's arti-
cle on the Lord's Supper at Smalcald, referred to in a
previous chapter; from the changes which he made
1540 in Article X of the Augsburg Confession; from his
later indefinite statements concerning the real presence
in the Holy Supper; from his intimate relations and his
cordial correspondence with Calvin; from his public
indifference and neutrality during the eucharistic controversy
with the Calvinists; and from his unfriendly
attitude toward the champions of Luther in this conflict.

#### 201.Misled by Oecolampadius and Bucer.

That Melanchthon permitted himself to be guided
by human authorities rather than by the clear Word of
God alone, appears from the fact that Oecolampadius's
Dialogus of 1530-which endeavored to show that the
symbolical interpretation of the words of institution is
found also in the writings of the Church Fathers,
notably in those of St. Augustine, and which
Melanchthon, in a letter to Luther (C. R. 2, 217), says,
was written "with greater exactness (accuratius) than he
is otherwise wont to write"-made such a profound
impression on him that ever since, as is shown by some
of his private letters, to which we shall presently refer, he
looked with increasing favor on the figurative interpretation.
As a result, Melanchthon's attitude toward the
Southern Germans and the Zwinglians also underwent
a marked change.When he left to attend the conference
with Bucer at Cassel, in December, 1534, Luther in
strong terms enjoined him to defend the sacramental
union and the oral eating and drinking; namely, that in
and with the bread the body of Christ is truly present,
distributed, and eaten. Luther's Opinion in this matter,
dated December 17, 1534, concludes as follows "Und ist
Summa das unsere Meinung, dass wahrhaftig in und
mit dem Brot der Leib Christi gegessen wird, also dass
alles, was das Brot wirkt und leidet, der Leib Christi
wirke und leide, dass er ausgeteilt [ge]gessen und mit
den Zaehnen zerbissen werde." (St. L. 17, 2052.) Selfevidently,
when writing thus,Luther had no Capernaitic
eating and drinking in mind, his object merely being, as
stated to emphasize the reality of the sacramental
union. January 10, 1535, however, the day after his
return from Cassel,Melanchthon wrote to his intimate
friend Camerarius that at Cassel he had been the messenger
not of his own, but of a foreign opinion. (C. R. 2,
822)

As a matter of fact, Melanchthon returned to
Wittenberg a convert to the compromise formula of
Bucer, according to which Christ's body and blood are
truly and substantially received in the Sacrament, but
are not really connected with the bread and wine, the
signs or signa exhibitiva, as Bucer called them. Stating
the difference between Luther and Bucer, as he now saw
it, Melanchthon said: "The only remaining question
therefore is the one concerning the physical union of
the bread and body,-and of what need is this question?
Tantum igitur reliqua est quaestio de physica coniunctione
panis et corporis, qua quaestione quid opus est?"(C.
R. 2, 827. 842; St. L. 17, 2057.) To Erhard Schnepf he had
written: "He [Bucer] confesses that, when these things,
bread and wine, are given, Christ is truly and substantially
present. As for me I would not demand anything
further."(C.R. 2, 787.) In February he wrote to Brenz:"I
plainly judge that they [Bucer, etc.] are not far from the
view of our men; indeed in the matter itself they agree
with us (reipsa convenire), nor do I condemn them." (2,
843; St. L. 17, 2065.) This, however, was not Luther's
view. In a following letter Melanchthon said: "Although
Luther does not openly condemn it [the formula of
Bucer], yet he did not wish to give his opinion upon it
as yet. Lutherus, etsi non plane damnat, tamen nondum
voluit pronuntiare." (C. R. 2, 843; St. L. 17, 2062.) A letter
of February 1, 1535, to Philip of Hesse and another
of February 3, to Bucer, also both reveal, on the one
hand,Melanchthon's desire for a union on Bucer's platform
and, on the other, Luther's attitude of aloofness
and distrust. (C. R. 2, 836. 841.)

#### 202. Secret Letters and the Variata of 1540.

In the letter to Camerarius of January 10, 1535,
referred to in the preceding paragraph, Melanchthon
plainly indicates that his views of the Holy Supper no
longer agreed with Luther's."Do not ask for my opinion
now," says he, "for I was the messenger of an opinion
foreign to me, although, forsooth, I will not hide what I
think when I shall have heard what our men answer.But
concerning this entire matter either personally or when
I shall have more reliable messengers.Meam sententiam
noli nunc requirere; fui enim nuntius alienae, etsi profecto
non dissimulabo, quid sentiam, ubi audiero, quid
respondeant nostri. Ac de hac re tota aut coram, aut cum
habebo certiores tabellarios." (2, 822.) Two days later,
January 12, 1535,Melanchthon wrote a letter to Brenz
(partly in Greek, which language he employed when he
imparted thoughts which he regarded as dangerous, as,
e.g., in his defamatory letter to Camerarius, July 24,
1525, on Luther's marriage; C. R. 1, 754), in which he
lifted the veil still more and gave a clear glimpse of his
own true inwardness. From this letter it plainly appears
that Melanchthon was no longer sure of the correctness
of the literal interpretation of the words of institution,
the very foundation of Luther's entire doctrine concerning the Holy Supper.

The letter reads, in part, as follows: "You have written
several times concerning the Sacramentarians, and
you disadvise the Concord, even though they should
incline towards Luther's opinion. My dear Brenz, if
there are any who differ from us regarding the Trinity or
other articles, I will have no alliance with them, but
regard them as such who are to be execrated ...
Concerning the Concord, however, no action whatever
has as yet been taken. I have only brought Bucer's opinions
here [to Wittenberg].But I wish that I could talk to
you personally concerning the controversy. I do not
constitute myself a judge, and readily yield to you, who
govern the Church, and I affirm the real presence of
Christ in the Supper. I do not desire to be the author or
defender of a new dogma in the Church, but I see that
there are many testimonies of the ancient writers who
without any ambiguity explain the mystery typically
and tropically [peri; tuvpou kai; tropikw'"], while the
opposing testimonies are either more modern or spurious.
You, too, will have to investigate whether you
defend the ancient opinion. But I do wish earnestly that
the pious Church would decide this case without
sophistry and tyranny. In France and at other places
many are killed on account of this opinion. And many
applaud such judgments without any good reason, and
strengthen the fury of the tyrants. To tell the truth, this
matter pains me not a little. Therefore my only request
is that you do not pass on this matter rashly, but consult
also the ancient Church. I most fervently desire that a
concord be effected without any sophistry. But I desire
also that good men may be able to confer on this great
matter in a friendly manner. Thus a concord might be
established without sophistry. For I do not doubt that
the adversaries would gladly abandon the entire dogma
if they believed that it was new. You know that among
them are many very good men. Now they incline
toward Luther, being moved by a few testimonies of
ecclesiastical writers.What, then, do you think, ought to
be done? Will you forbid also that we confer together?
As for me, I desire that we may be able frequently to
confer together on this matter as well as on many others.
You see that in other articles they as well as we now
explain many things more skilfully (dexterius) since
they have begun to be agitated among us more diligently.
However, I conclude and ask you to put the best construction
on this letter, and, after reading it, to tear it up
immediately, and to show it to nobody." (C. R. 2, 823f.;
Luther, St. L. 17, 2060.)

In a letter to Veit Dietrich, dated April 23, 1538,
Melanchthon declares: "In order not to deviate too far
from the ancients, I have maintained a sacramental
presence in the use, and said that, when these things are
given, Christ is truly present and efficacious. That is certainly
enough. I have not added an inclusion or a connection
by which the body is affixed to, concatenated or
mixed with, the bread. Sacraments are covenants
[assuring us] that something else is present when the
things are received.Nec addidi inclusionem aut coniunctionem
talem, qua affigeretur tw'/ a[rtw/ to; sw'ma aut
ferruminaretur, aut misceretur. Sacramenta pacta sunt,
ut rebus sumptis adsit aliud ...What more do you desire?
And this will have to be resorted to lest you defend what
some even now are saying, viz., that the body and blood
are tendered separately-separatim tradi corpus et sanguinem.
This too, is new and will not even please the
Papists. Error is fruitful, as the saying goes. That physical
connection (illa physica coniunctio) breeds many
questions: Whether the parts are separate; whether
included; when [in what moment] they are present;
whether [they are present] apart from the use. Of this
nothing is read among the ancients. Nor do I,my dear
Veit, carry these disputations into the Church; and in
the Loci I have spoken so sparingly on this matter in
order to lead the youth away from these questions. Such
is in brief and categorically what I think. But I wish that
the two most cruel tyrants, animosity and sophistry,
would be removed for a while, and a just deliberation
held concerning the entire matter. If I have not satisfied
you by this simple answer, I shall expect of you a longer
discussion. I judge that in this manner I am speaking
piously, carefully, and modestly concerning the symbols,
and approach as closely as possible to the opinion
of the ancients." (C. R. 3, 514f.) A month later,May 24,
Melanchthon again added: "I have simply written you
what I think, nor do I detract anything from the words.
For I know that Christ is truly and substantially present
and efficacious when we use the symbols. You also
admit a synecdoche. But to add a division and separation
of the body and blood, that is something altogether
new and unheard of in the universal ancient Church."
(3, 536; 7, 882.

#### 203.Not in Sympathy with Lutheran Champions.

When Westphal, in 1552, pointed out the
Calvinistic menace and sounded the tocsin, loyal
Lutherans everywhere enlisted in the controversy to
defend Luther's doctrine concerning the real presence
and the divine majesty of Christ's human nature. But
Melanchthon again utterly failed the Lutheran Church
both as a leader and a private. For although
Lutheranism in this controversy was fighting for its very
existence,Master Philip remained silent, non-committal,
neutral. Viewed in the light of the conditions then
prevailing, it was impossible to construe this attitude as
pro-Lutheran. Moreover, whenever and wherever
Melanchthon, in his letters and opinions written during
this controversy, did show his colors to some extent, it
was but too apparent that his mind and heart was with
the enemies rather than with the champions of
Lutheranism. For while his letters abound with flings
and thrusts against the men who defended the doctrines
of the sacramental union and the omnipresence
of the human nature of Christ, he led Calvin and his
adherents to believe that he was in sympathy with them
and their cause.

Melanchthon's animosity ran high not only against
such extremists as Saliger (Beatus) and Fredeland (both
were deposed in Luebeck 1568 and Saliger again in
Rostock 1569) who taught that in virtue of the consecration
before the use (ante usum) bread and wine are
the body and blood of Christ, denouncing all who
denied this as Sacramentarians (Gieseler 3, 2, 257), but
also against all those who faithfully adhered to, and
defended, Luther's phraseology concerning the Lord's
Supper. He rejected the teaching of Westphal and the
Hamburg ministers, according to which in the Lord's
Supper, the bread is properly called the body of Christ
and the wine the blood of Christ, and stigmatized their
doctrine as "bread-worship, ajrtolatreiva." (C. R. 8,
362. 660. 791; 9, 470. 962.)

In a similar manner Melanchthon ridiculed the old
Lutheran teaching of the omnipresence of Christ
according to His human nature as a new and foolish
doctrine.Concerning the Confession and Report of the
Wuerttemberg Theologians, framed by Brenz and
adopted 1559, which emphatically asserted the real
presence, as well as the omnipresence of Christ also
according to His human nature, Melanchthon
remarked contemptuously in a letter to Jacob Runge,
dated February 1, 1560 and in a letter to G. Cracow,
dated February 3, 1560, that he could not characterize
"the decree of the Wuerttemberg Fathers (Abbates
Wirtebergenses) more aptly than as Hechinger Latin
(Hechingense Latinum,Hechinger Latein),"i.e., as absurd
and insipid teaching. (9, 1035f.; 7, 780. 884.)

#### 204.Melanchthon Claimed by Calvin.

In 1554 Nicholas Gallus of Regensburg republished,
with a preface of his own, Philip Melanchthon's
Opinions of Some Ancient Writers Concerning the Lord's
Supper. The timely reappearance of this book, which
Melanchthon, in 1530, had directed against the
Zwinglians, was most embarrassing to him as well as to
his friend Calvin. The latter, therefore, now urged him
to break his silence and come out openly against his
public assailants. But Melanchthon did not consider it
expedient to comply with this request.Privately, however,
he answered, October 14, 1554: "As regards your
admonition in your last letter that I repress the ignorant
clamors of those who renew the strife concerning the
bread-worship, know that some of them carry on this
disputation out of hatred toward me in order to have a
plausible reason for oppressing me. Quod me hortaris,
ut reprimam ineruditos clamores illorum, qui renovant
certamen periV ajrtolatreiva", scito, quosdam praecipue
odio mei eam disputationem movere, ut habeant plausibilem
causam ad me opprimendum." (8, 362.) Fully persuaded
that he was in complete doctrinal agreement
with his Wittenberg friend on the controverted questions,
Calvin finally, in his Last Admonition (Ultima
Admonitio) to Westphal, 1557, publicly claimed
Melanchthon as his ally, and implored him to give public
testimony "that they [the Calvinists and Zwinglians]
teach nothing foreign to the Augsburg Confession, nihil
alienum nos tradere a Confessione Augustana." "I confirm,"
Calvin here declared,"that in this cause [concerning
the Lord's Supper] Philip can no more be torn from
me than from his own bowels. Confirmo, non magis a
me Philippum quam a propriis visceribus in hoc causa
posse divelli." (C. R. 37 [Calvini Opp. {{< hiddenanchor 9 >}}9{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 148. 149. 193.
466; Gieseler 3, 2, 219, Tschackert, 536.) Melanchthon,
however, continued to preserve his sphinxlike silence,
which indeed declared as loud as words could have
done that he favored the Calvinists, and was opposed to
those who defended Luther's doctrine.To Mordeisen he
wrote,November 15, 1557:"If you will permit me to live
at a different place, I shall reply, both truthfully and
earnestly to these unlearned sycophants, and say things
that are useful to the Church." (C. R. 9, 374.)

After the death of Melanchthon, Calvin wrote in his
Dilucida Explicatio against Hesshusius, 1561: "O Philip
Melanchthon! For it is to you that I appeal, who art living
with Christ in the presence of God and there waiting
for us until we shall be assembled with you into
blessed rest. A hundred times you have said, when,
fatigued with labor and overwhelmed with cares, you, as
an intimate friend, familiarly laid your head upon my
breast: Would to God I might die on this bosom! But
afterwards I have wished a thousand times that we
might be granted to be together. You would certainly
have been more courageous to engage in battle and
stronger to despise envy, and disregard false accusations.
In this way, too, the wickedness of many would have
been restrained whose audacity to revile grew from
your pliability, as they called it. O Philippe Melanchthon!
Te enim appello, qui apud Deum cum Christo vivis,
nosque illic exspectas, donec tecum in beatam quietem colligamur.
Dixisti centies, quum fessus laboribus et molestiis
oppressus caput familiariter in sinum meum deponeres:
Utinam, utinam moriar in hoc sinu! Ego vero millies
postea optavi nobis contingere, ut simul essemus. Certe
animosior fuisses ad obeunda certamina et ad spernendam
invidiam falsasque criminationes pro nihilo ducendas
fortior. Hoc quoque modo cohibita fuisset multorum
improbitos, quibus ex tua mollitie, quam vocabant, crevit
insultandi audacia." (C. R. 37 [Calvini Opp. {{< hiddenanchor 9 >}}9{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 461f.) It
was not Melanchthon, but Westphal, who disputed
Calvin's claim by publishing (1557) extracts from
Melanchthon's former writings under the title:
Clarissimi Viri Ph. Melanchthonis Sententia de Coena
Domini, ex scriptis eius collecta.But, alas, the voice of the
later Melanchthon was not that of the former!

#### 205.Advising the Crypto-Calvinists.

In various other ways Melanchthon showed his
impatience with the defenders of Luther's doctrine and
his sympathy with their Calvinistic opponents. When
Timann of Bremen,who sided with Westphal, opposed
Hardenberg, a secret, but decided Calvinist,
Melanchthon admonished the latter not to rush into a
conflict with his colleagues, but to dissimulate. He says
in a letter of April 23, 1556:"Te autem oro, ne properes ad
certamen cum collegis. Oro etiam, ut multa dissimules."
(C. R. 8, 736.) Another letter (May 9, 1557), in which he
advises Hardenberg how to proceed against his opponents,
begins as follows: "Reverend Sir and Dear
Brother. As you see, not only the controversy, but also
the madness (rabies) of the writers who establish the
bread-worship is growing." (9, 154.) He meant theologians
who, like Timann and Westphal, defended
Luther's doctrine that in the Lord's Supper the bread is
truly the body of Christ and the wine truly the blood of
Christ and that Christ is truly present also according to
His human nature.Again, when at Heidelberg, in 1569,
Hesshusius refused to acknowledge the Calvinist
Klebitz (who had publicly defended the Reformed doctrine)
as his assistant in the distribution of the Lord's
Supper, and Elector Frederick III, the patron of the
Crypto-Calvinists, who soon after joined the Reformed
Church, demanded that Hesshusius come to an agreement
with Klebitz, and finally deposed the former and
dismissed the latter, Melanchthon approved of the
unionistic methods of the Elector, and prepared
ambiguous formulas to satisfy both parties.

In the Opinion requested by the Elector, dated
November 1, 1559,Melanchthon said:"To answer is not
difficult, but dangerous ... Therefore I approve of the
measure of the illustrious Elector, commanding silence
to the disputants on both sides [Hesshusius and the
Calvinist Klebitz], lest dissension occur in the weak
church ... The contentious men having been removed, it
will be profitable that the rest agree on one form of
words. It would be best in this controversy to retain the
words of Paul: 'The bread which we break is the communion
(koinwniva) of Christ.' Much ought to be said
concerning the fruit of the Supper to invite men to love
this pledge and to use it frequently.And the word 'communion'must
be explained: Paul does not say that the
nature of the bread is changed, as the Papists say; He
does not say, as those of Bremen do, that the bread is the
substantial body of Christ; he does not say that the
bread is the true body of Christ, as Hesshusius does; but
that it is the communion, i.e., that by which the union
occurs (consociatio fit) with the body of Christ, which
occurs in the use, and certainly not without thinking, as
when mice gnaw the bread ... The Son of God is present
in the ministry of the Gospel, and there He is certainly
efficacious in the believers, and He is present not on
account of the bread, but on account of man,as He says,
'Abide in Me and I in you,' Again: 'I am in My Father,
and you in Me, and I in you,'And in these true consolations
He makes us members of His, and testifies that He
will raise our bodies. Thus the ancients explain the
Lord's Supper." (C. R. 9, 961.) No doubt, Calvin, too,
would readily have subscribed to these ambiguous and
indefinite statements. C. P. Krauth pertinently remarks:
"Whatever may be the meaning of Melanchthon's
words in the disputed cases, this much is certain, that
they practically operated as if the worse sense were the
real one, and their mischievousness was not diminished,
but aggravated, by their obscurity and double
meaning. They did the work of avowed error, and yet
could not be reached as candid error might." (Cons.
Ref., 291.)

#### 206. Historians on Melanchthon's Doctrinal Departures.

Modern historians are generally agreed that also
with respect to the Lord's Supper the later Melanchthon
was not identical with the earlier. Tschackert:
"Melanchthon had long ago [before the outbreak of the
second controversy on the Lord's Supper] receded from
the peculiarities of the Lutheran doctrine of the Lord's
Supper; he was satisfied with maintaining the personal
presence of Christ during the Supper, leaving the mode
of His presence and efficacy in doubt." (532.) Seeberg,
who maintains that Melanchthon as early as 1531
departed from Luther's teaching concerning the Lord's
Supper, declares: "Melanchthon merely does not want
to admit that the body of Christ is really eaten in the
Supper, and that it is omnipresent as such." (4, 2, 449.)
Theo. Kolde: "It should never have been denied that
these alterations in Article X of the Augustana involved
real changes ... In view of his gradually changed conception
of the Lord's Supper, there can be no doubt that
he sought to leave open for himself and others the possibility
of associating also with the Swiss." (25.) Schaff:
"Melanchthon's later view of the Lord's Supper agreed
essentially with that of Calvin." (1, 280.)

Such, then, being the attitude of Melanchthon as to
the doctrine of the Lord's Supper, it was but natural and
consistent that his pupils, who looked up to Master
Philip with unbounded admiration, should become
decided Calvinists. Melanchthon, chiefly, must be held
responsible for the Calvinistic menace which threatened
the Lutheran Church after the death of Luther. In the
interest of fraternal relations with the Swiss, he was
ready to compromise and modify the Lutheran truth.
Sadly he had his way, and had not the tendency which
he inaugurated been checked, the Lutheran Church
would have lost its character and been transformed into
a Reformed or, at least, a unionistic body. In a degree,
this guilt was shared also by his older Wittenberg colleagues:
Caspar Cruciger, Sr., Paul Eber, John Foerster,
and others, who evidently inclined toward
Melanchthon's view and attitude also in the matter concerning
the Lord's Supper. Caspar Cruciger, for example,
as appears from his letter to Veit Dietrich, dated
April 18, 1538, taught the bodily presence of Christ in
the use of the Lord's Supper, but not "the division or
separation of the body and blood."(C.R. 3, 610.) Shortly
before his death, as related in a previous chapter, Luther
had charged these men with culpable silence with
regard to the truth, declaring: "If you believe as you
speak in my presence then speak the same way in
church, in public lectures, in sermons, and in private
discussions, and strengthen your brethren, and lead the
erring back to the right way, and contradict the wilful
spirits; otherwise your confession is a mere sham and
will be of no value whatever." (Walther, 40.) Refusal to
confess the truth will ultimately always result in rejection
of the truth. Silence here is the first step to open
denial.

#### 207.Westphal First to Sound Tocsin.

Foremost among the men who saw through Calvin
s plan of propagating the Reformed doctrine of the
Lord's Supper under phrases coming as close as possible
to the Lutheran terminology, and who boldly, determinedly
and ably opposed the Calvinistic propaganda
was Joachim Westphal ofHamburg [born 1510; 1527 in
Wittenberg; since 1541 pastor in Hamburg; died
January 16, {{< hiddenanchor 1574 >}}1574{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. Fully realizing the danger which
threatened the entire Lutheran Church, he regarded it as
his sacred duty to raise his voice and warn the Lutherans
against the Calvinistic menace. He did so in a publication
entitled: "Farrago Confusanearum et inter se
Dissidentium Opinionum de Coena Domini-Medley of
Confused and Mutually Dissenting Opinions on the
Lord s Supper, compiled from the books of the
Sacramentarians," 1552. In it he proved that in reality
Calvin and his adherents, despite their seemingly orthodox
phrases, denied the real presence of the body and
blood of Christ in the Lord's Supper just as emphatically
and decidedly as Zwingli had done.At the same time
he refuted in strong terms the Reformed doctrine in the
manner indicated by the title, and maintained the
Lutheran doctrine of the real presence, the oral eating
and drinking (manducatio oralis), also of unbelievers.
Finally he appealed to the Lutheran theologians and
magistrates everywhere to guard their churches against
the Calvinistic peril. "The Farrago," says Kruske, "signified
the beginning of the end of Calvin's domination in
Germany."Schaff:"The controversy ofWestphal against
Calvin and the subsequent overthrow of
Melanchthonianism completed and consolidated the
separation of the two Confessions," Lutheran and
Reformed. (Creeds 1, 280.)

Thus Westphal stands preeminent among the men
who saved the Lutheran Church from the Calvinistic
peril. To add fuel to the anti-Calvinistic movement,
Westphal, in the year following, published a second
book: "Correct Faith (correcta Fides) Concerning the
Lord's Supper, demonstrated and confirmed from the
words of the Apostle Paul and the Evangelists," 1553.
Here he again called upon all true disciples of Luther to
save his doctrine from the onslaughts of the Calvinists,
who, he declared, stooped to every method in order to
conquer Germany for Zwinglianism.

Westphal's fiery appeals for Lutheran loyalty
received a special emphasis and wide publicity when the
Pole, John of Lasco (Laski), who in 1553, together with
175 members of his London congregation, had been
driven from England by Bloody Mary, reached the
Continent. The liberty which Lasco, who in 1552 had
publicly adopted the Consensus Tigurinus, requested in
Lutheran territories for himself and his Reformed con-
gregation, was refused in Denmark, Wismar, Luebeck
and Hamburg, but finally granted in Frankfort-on-the-
Main. Soon after, in 1554, the Calvinistic preacher
Micronius, who also sought refuge in Hamburg, was
forbidden to make that city the seat of Reformed activity
and propaganda.As a result, Calvin decided to enter
the arena against Westphal. In 1555 he published his
Defensio Sanae et Orthodoxae Doctrinae de Saoramentis,
"Defense of the Sound and Orthodox Doctrine
Concerning the Sacraments and Their Nature, Power,
Purpose, Use, and Fruit, which the pastors and ministers
of the churches in Zurich and Geneva before this
have comprised into a brief formula of the mutual
Agreement" (Consensus Tigurinus). In it he attacked
Westphal in such an insulting and overbearing manner
(comparing him, e. g. with "a mad dog") that from the
very begInning the controversy was bound to assume a
personal and acrimonious character.

#### 208.Controversial Publications.

After Calvin had entered the controversy Westphal
was joined by such Lutherans as John Timann, Paul v.
Eitzen, Erhard Schnepf, Alber, Gallus, Flacius, Judex,
Brenz, Andreae and others. Calvin, on the other hand,
was supported by Lasco, Bullinger, Ochino,Valerandus
Polanus, Beza (the most scurrillous of all the opponents
of Lutheranism), and Bibliander. In 1555 Westphal
published three additional books: Collection
(Collectanea) of Opinions of Aurelius Augustine
Concerning the Lord's Supper, and Faith (Fides) of Cyril,
Bishop of Alexandria, Concerning the Presence of the
Body and Blood of Christ, and Adversus cuiusdam
Sacramentarii Falsam Criminationem lusta Defensio,
"Just Defense against the False Accusation of a Certain
Sacramentarian." The last publication was a personal
defense against the insults and invectives of Calvin and
a further proof of the claim that the Calvinists were
united only in their denial of the real presence of Christ
in the Lord's Supper. Coming to the support of
Westphal, John Timann,Pastor in Bremen, published in
1555:"Medley (Farrago) of Opinions Agreeing in the True
and Catholic Doctrine Concerning the Lord's Supper,
which the churches of the Augsburg Confession have
embraced with firm assent and in one spirit according
to the divine Word." In the following year Calvin wrote
his Secunda Defensio ... contra J. Westphali Calumnias,
"Second Defense of the Pious and Orthodox Faith,
against the Calumnies of J.Westphal," a vitriolic book,
dedicated to the Crypto-Calvinists, viz.,"to all ministers
of Christ who cultivate and follow the pure doctrine of
the Gospel in the churches of Saxony and Lower
Germany." In it Calvin declared: "I teach that Christ,
though absent according to His body, is nevertheless not
only present with us according to His divine power, but
also makes His flesh vivifying for us." (C. R. 37 [Calvini
Opp. {{< hiddenanchor 9 >}}9{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 79.) Lasco also wrote two books against
Westphal and Timann, defending his congregation at
Frankfort, and endeavoring to show the agreement
between the Calvinian doctrine of the Lord's Supper
and the Augsburg Confession. In 1556 Henry appeared
on the battlefield with his Apologetical Exposition,
Apologetica Expositio, in which he endeavored to show
that the ministers of the churches in Zurich do not follow
any heretical dogma in the doctrine concerning the
Lord's Supper.

In the same year, 1556, Westphal published Epistola,
qua Breviter Respondet ad Convicia I. Calvini-"Letter
in which He [Westphal] Answers Briefly to the
Invectives of J. Calvin," and "Answer (Responsum) to the
Writing of John of Lasco, in which he transforms the
Augsburg Confession into Zwinglianism." In the same
year Westphal published "Confession of Faith (Confessio
Fidei) Concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in
which the ministers of the churches of Saxony maintain
the presence of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Holy Supper, and answer regarding the
book of Calvin dedicated to them." This publication
contained opinions which Westphal had secured from
the ministeriums ofMagdeburg (including Wigand and
Flacius), of Mansfeld, Bremen, Hildesheim, Hamburg,
Luebeck, Lueneburg, Brunswick (Moerlin and
Chemnitz), Hannover, Wismar, Schwerin, etc. All of
these ministeriums declared themselves unanimously
and definitely in favor of Luther's doctrine, appealing to
the words of institution as they read. In 1557 Erhard
Schnepf [born 1595; active in Nassau,Marburg, Speier,
Augsburg; attended convents in Smalcald 1537; in
Regensburg 1546, in Worms 1557; died {{< hiddenanchor 1558 >}}1558{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, then in
Jena, published his Confession Concerning the Supper. In
the same year Paul von Eitzen [born 1522; died 1598;
refused to sign Formula of Concord] published his
Defense of the True Doctrine Concerning the Supper of
Our Lord Jesus Christ. Westphal also made a second
attack on Lasco in his "Just Defense against the Manifest
Falsehoods of J. A. Lasco which he spread in his letter to
the King of Poland against the Saxon Churches," 1557.
In it he denounces Lasco and his congregation of foreigners,
and calls upon the magistrates to institute proceedings
against them.

Calvin now published his Ultima Admonitio, "Last
Admonition of John Calvin to J. Westphal, who, if he
does not obey (obtemperet) must thenceforth be held in
the manner as Paul commands us to hold obstinate
heretics; in this writing the vain censures of the
Magdeburgians and others, by which they endeavored
to wreck heaven and earth, are also refuted" 1557.Here
Calvin plainly reveals his Zwinglianism and says: "This
is the summary of our doctrine, that the flesh of Christ
is a vivifying bread because it truly nourishes and feeds
our souls when by faith we coalesce with it. This, we
teach, occurs spiritually only, because the bond of this
sacred unity is the secret and incomprehensible power
of the Holy Spirit." (C. R. 37 [Calvini Opp. {{< hiddenanchor 9 >}}9{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, 162.) In
this book Calvin also, as stated above, appeals to
Melanchthon to add his testimony that "we [the
Calvinists] teach nothing that conflicts with the
Augsburg Confession." Though Calvin had withdrawn
from the arena,Westphal continued to give public testimony
to the truth. In 1558 he wrote several books
against the Calvinists. One of them bears the title:
"Apologetical Writings (Apologetica Scripta) of J. W., in
which he both defends the sound doctrine concerning
the Eucharist and refutes the vile slanders of the
Sacramentarians,"etc.Another is entitled:Apology of the
Confession Concerning the Lord's Supper against the
Corruptions and Calumnies of John Calvin. In 1559
Theodore Beza donned the armor of Calvin and
entered the controversy with his "Treatise (Tractatio)
Concerning the Lord's Supper, in which the calumnies of
J. Westphal are refuted." Lasco's Reply to the Virulent
Letter of That Furious Man J. Westphal, of 1560,
appeared posthumously, he having died shortly before
in Poland.

#### 209. Brenz and Chemnitz.

Foremost among the influential theologians who
besides Westphal, took a decided stand against the
Calvinists and their secret abettors in Lutheran territories
were John Brenz in Wuerttemberg and Martin
Chemnitz in Brunswick. John Brenz [born 1499, persecuted
during the Interim, since 1553 Provost at
Stuttgart, died {{< hiddenanchor 1570 >}}1570{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, the most influential theologian in
Wuerttemberg, was unanimously supported in his anti-
Calvinistic attitude by the whole ministerium of the
Duchy. He is the author of the Confession and Report
(Bekenntnis und Bericht) of the Theologians in
Wuerttemberg Concerning the True Presence of the Body
and Blood of Christ in the Holy Supper, adopted at the
behest of Duke Christopher by the synod assembled in
Stuttgart, 1559. The occasion for drafting and adopting
this Confession had been furnished by Bartholomew
Hagen, a Calvinist. At the synod in Stuttgart he was
required to dispute on the doctrine of the Lord's Supper
with Jacob Andreae, with the result that Hagen admitted
that he was now convinced of his error, and promised
to return to the Lutheran teaching.

The Confession thereupon adopted teaches in plain
and unmistakable terms that the body and blood of
Christ are orally received by all who partake of the
Sacrament, and that Christ, by reason of the personal
union, is omnipresent also according to His human
nature, and hence well able to fulfil the promise He gave
at the institution of the Holy Supper. It teaches the real
presence (praesentia realis), the sacramental union
(unio sacramentalis), the oral eating and drinking (manducatio
oralis), also of the wicked (manducatio impiorum).
It holds "that in the Lord's Supper the true body
and the true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ are, through
the power of the word [of institution], truly and essentially
tendered and given with the bread and wine to all
men who partake of the Supper of Christ; and that, even
as they are tendered by the hand of the minister, they are
at the same time also received with the mouth of him
who eats and drinks it." Furthermore, "that even as the
substance and the essence of the bread and wine are
present in the Lord's Supper, so also the substance and
the essence of the body and blood of Christ are present
and truly tendered and received with the signs of bread
and wine." (Tschackert, 541.) It protests: "We do not
assert any mixture of His body and blood with the
bread and wine, nor any local inclusion in the bread."
Again: "We do not imagine any diffusion of the human
nature or expansion of the members of Christ (ullam
humanae naturae diffusionem aut membrorum Christi
distractionem), but we explain the majesty of the man
Christ by which He, being placed at the right hand of
God, fills all things not only by His divinity, but also as
the man Christ, in a celestial manner and in a way that
to human reason is past finding out, by virtue of which
majesty His presence in the Supper is not abolished, but
confirmed." (Gieseler 3 2, 239f.) Thus,without employing
the term "ubiquity," this Confession prepared by
Brenz restored, in substance, the doctrine concerning
the Lord's Supper and the person of Christ which
Luther had maintained over against Zwingli, Carlstadt,
and the Sacramentarians generally.

As stated above, Melanchthon ridiculed this
Confession as "Hechinger Latin." In 1561 Brenz was
attacked by Bullinger in his Treatise (Tractatio) on the
Words of St. John 14. In the same year Brenz replied to
this attack in two writings: Opinion (Sententia) on the
Book of Bullinger and On the Personal Union (De
Personali Unione) of the Two Natures in Christ and on the
Ascension of Christ into Heaven and His Sitting at the
Right Hand of the Father, etc. This called forth renewed
assaults by Bullinger, Peter Martyr, and Beza. Bullinger
wrote: "Answer (Responsio), by which is shown that the
meaning concerning 'heaven' and the 'right hand of
God' still stands firm," 1562. Peter Martyr: Dialogs
(Dialogi) Concerning the Humanity of Christ, the
Property of the Natures, and Ubiquity, 1562. Beza:
Answers (Responsiones) to the Arguments of Brenz, 1564.
Brenz answered in two of his greatest writings,
Concerning the Divine Majesty of Christ (De Divina
Maiestate Christi), 1562, and Recognition (Recognito) of
the Doctrine Concerning the True Majesty of Christ, 1564.
In the Dresden Consensus (Consensus Dresdensis) of
1571 the Philippists of Electoral Saxony also rejected the
omnipresence (which they termed ubiquity) of the
human nature of Christ.

In order to reclaim the Palatinate (which, as will be
explained later, had turned Reformed) for Lutheranism
the Duke ofWuerttemberg, in April, 1564, arranged for
the Religious Discussion at Maulbronn between the
theologians of Wuerttemberg and the Palatinate. But
the only result was a further exchange of polemical publications.
In 1564 Brenz published Epitome of the
Maulbronn Colloquium ... Concerning the Lord's Supper
and the Majesty of Christ. And in the following year the
Wuerttemberg theologians published Declaration and
Confession (Declaratio et Confessio) of the Tuebingen
Theologians Concerning the Majesty of the Man Christ.
Both of these writings were answered by the theologians
of the Palatinate. After the death of Brenz, Jacob
Andreae was the chief champion in Wuerttemberg of
the doctrines set forth by Brenz.

In his various publications against the Calvinists,
Brenz, appealing to Luther, taught concerning the
majesty of Christ that by reason of the personal union
the humanity of Christ is not only omnipotent and
omniscient, but also omnipresent, and that the human
nature of Christ received these as well as other divine
attributes from the first moment of the incarnation of
the Logos.Following are some of his statements:"Although
the divine substance [in Christ] is not changed into the
human, and each has its own properties, nevertheless
these two substances are united in one person in Christ
in such a manner that the one is never in reality separated
from the other." "Wherever the deity is, there is
also the humanity of Christ." "We do not ascribe to
Christ many and various bodies, nor do we ascribe to
His body local extension or diffusion; but we exalt Him
beyond this corporeal world, outside of every creature
and place, and place Him in accordance with the condition
of the hypostatic union in celestial majesty, which
He never lacked, though at the time of His flesh in this
world He hid it or, as Paul says, He humbled Himself
(quam etsi tempore carnis suae in hoc saeculo dissimulavit,
seu ea sese, ut Paulus loquitur, exinanivit, tamen
numquam ea caruit)."

According to Brenz the man Christ was omnipotent,
almighty, omniscient while He lay in the manger.
In His majesty He darkened the sun, and kept alive all
the living while in His humiliation He was dying on the
cross.When dead in the grave,He at the same time was
filling and ruling heaven and earth with His power.
(Gieseler 3, 2, 240f.)

In Brunswick, Martin Chemnitz (born 1522; died
1586), the Second Martin (alter Martinus) of the
Lutheran Church, entered the controversy against the
Calvinists in 1560 with his Repetition (Repetitio) of the
Sound Doctrine Concerning the True Presence of the Body
and Blood of Christ in the Supper, in which he based his
arguments for the real presence on the words of institution.
Ten years later he published his famous book
Concerning the Two Natures in Christ (De Duabus
Naturis in Christo), etc.,-preeminently the Lutheran
classic on the subject it treats. Appealing also to Luther,
he teaches that Christ, according to His human nature
was anointed with all divine gifts; that, in consequence
of the personal union, the human nature of Christ can
be and is present where, when, and in whatever way
Christ will; that therefore in accordance with His promise,
He is in reality present in His Church and in His
Supper. Chemnitz says: "This presence of the assumed
nature in Christ of which we now treat is not natural or
essential [flowing from the nature and essence of
Christ's humanity], but voluntary and most free,
depending on the will and power of the Son of God
(non est vel naturalis vel essentialis, sed voluntaria et liberrima,
dependens a voluntate et potentia Filii Dei); that is
to say, when by a definite word He has told, promised,
and asseverated that He would be present with His
human nature, ... Iet us retain this, which is most certainly
true, that Christ can be with His body wherever,
whenever, and in whatever manner He wills (Christum
suo corpore esse posse, ubicunque, quandocunque et quomodocunque
vult.). But we must judge of His will from
a definite, revealed word."(Tschackert, 644; Gieseler 3, 2,
259.)

The Formula of Concord plainly teaches, both that,
in virtue of the personal union by His incarnation,
Christ according to His human nature possesses also the
divine attribute of omnipresence, and that He can be
and is present wherever He will. In the Epitome we read:
This majesty Christ always had according to the per-
sonal union, and yet He abstained from it in the state of
His humiliation until His resurrection,"so that now not
only as God, but also as man He knows all things, can
do all things, is present with all creatures, and has under
His feet and in His hand everything that is in heaven
and on earth and under the earth ...And this His power
He, being present, can exercise everywhere, and to Him
everything is possible and everything is known." (821,
16. 27. 30.) The Thorough Declaration declares that
Christ "truly fills all things, and, being present everywhere,
not only as God, but also as man, rules from sea
to sea and to the ends of the earth." (1025, 27ff.) Again:
"We hold ... that also according to His assumed human
nature and with the same He [Christ] can be, and also
is, present where He will, and especially that in His
Church and congregation on earth He is present as
Mediator, Head, King, and High Priest, not in part, or
one-half of Him only, but the entire person of Christ, to
which both natures, the divine and the human, belong,
is present not only according to His divinity, but also
according to, and with, His assumed human nature,
according to which He is our Brother, and we are flesh
of His flesh and bone of His bone." (1043 78f.) In virtue
of the personal union Christ is present everywhere also
according to His human nature; while the peculiarly
gracious manner of His presence in the Gospel, in the
Church, and in the Lord's Supper depends upon His
will and is based upon His definite promises.

#### 210. Bremen and the Palatinate Lost for Lutheranism.

The indignation of the Lutherans against the
Calvinistic propaganda, roused by Westphal and his
comrades in their conflict with Calvin and his followers,
was materially increased by the success of the crafty
Calvinists in Bremen and in the Palatinate. In 1547
Hardenberg [Albert Rizaeus from Hardenberg Holland,
born {{< hiddenanchor 1510 >}}1510{{< /hiddenanchor >}} was appointed Dome-preacher in Bremen.
He was a former priest whom Lasco had won for the
Reformation. Regarding the doctrine of the Lord's
Supper he inclined towards Zwingli. Self-evidently,
when his views became known, the situation in Bremen
became intolerable for his Lutheran colleagues. How
could they associate with and fellowship, a Calvinist! To
acknowledge him would have been nothing short of
surrendering their own views and the character of the
Lutheran Church. The result was that John Timann
[pastor in Bremen; wrote a tract against the Interim,
died February 17 {{< hiddenanchor 1557 >}}1557{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, in order to compel Hardenberg
to unmask and reveal his true inwardness, demanded
that all the ministers of Bremen subscribe to the Farrago
Sententiarum Consentientium in Vera Doctrina et Coena
Domini which he had published in 1555 against the
Calvinists.Hardenberg and two other ministers refused
to comply with the demand. In particular, Hardenberg
objected to the omnipresence of the human nature of
Christ taught in Timann's Farrago. In his Doctrinal
Summary (Summaria Doctrina) Hardenberg taught:
"St. Augustine and many other fathers write that the
body of Christ is circumscribed by a certain space in
heaven, and I regard this as the true doctrine of the
Church." (Tschackert, 191.) Hardenberg also published
the fable hatched at Heidelberg (Heidelberger Landluege,
indirectly referred to also in the Formula of Concord,
981, 28), but immediately refuted by Joachim Moerlin,
according to which Luther is said, toward the end of his
life, to have confessed to Melanchthon that he had gone
too far and overdone the matter in his controversy
against the Sacramentarians; that he, however, did not
want to retract his doctrine concerning the Lord's
Supper himself, because that would cast suspicion on
his whole teaching; that therefore after his death the
younger theologians might make amends for it and settle
this matter ... In 1556 Timann began to preach
against Hardenberg, but died the following year. The
Lower Saxon Diet, however, decided February 8, 1561,
that Hardenberg be dismissed within fourteen days, yet
"without infamy or condemnation, citra infamiam et
condemnationem." Hardenberg submitted under
protest and left Bremen February 18, 1561 (he died as a
Reformed preacher at Emden, 1574). Simon Musaeus
who had just been expelled from Jena, was called as
Superintendent to purge Bremen of Calvinism. Before
long, however, the burgomaster of the city, Daniel von
Bueren, whom Hardenberg had secretly won for the
Reformed doctrine, succeeded in expelling the
Lutheran ministers from the city and in filling their
places with Philippists, who before long joined the
Reformed Church. Thus ever since 1562 Bremen has
been a Reformed city.

A much severer blow was dealt Lutheranism when
the Palatinate, the home of Melanchthon, where the
Philippists were largely represented, was Calvinized by
Elector Frederick III. Tileman Hesshusius [Hesshusen,
born 1527; 1553 superintendent at Goslar; 1556 professor
and pastor at Rostock; 1557 at Heidelberg; 1560 pastor
at Magdeburg; 1562 court-preacher at Neuburg;
1569 professor at Jena; 1573 bishop of Samland, at
Koenigsberg; 1577 professor at Helmstedt where he
died {{< hiddenanchor 1588 >}}1588{{< /hiddenanchor >}} was called in 1557 by Elector Otto Henry to
Heidelberg both as professor and pastor and as superintendent
of the Palatinate. Here the Calvinists and
Crypto-Calvinists had already done much to under-
mine Lutheranism; and after the death of Otto Henry,
February 12, 1559,Hesshusius who endeavored to stem
the Crypto-Calvinistic tide, was no longer able to hold
his own. Under Elector Frederick III, who succeeded
Otto Henry, the Calvinists came out into the open.This
led to scandalous clashes, of which the Klebitz affair was
a typical and consequential instance. In order to obtain
the degree of Bachelor of Divinity,William Klebitz, the
deacon of Hesshusius, published, in 1560 a number of
Calvinistic theses.As a result Hesshusius most emphatically
forbade him henceforth to assist at the distribution
of the Holy Supper. When Klebitz nevertheless
appeared at the altar, Hesshusius endeavored to wrest
the cup from his hands. Elector Frederick ordered both
Hesshusius and Klebitz to settle their trouble in accordance
with the Augustana (Variata). Failing to comply
with this unionistic demand, Hesshusius was deposed,
September 16, 1559, and Klebitz, too was dismissed. In
a theological opinion, referred to above, Melanchthon
approved of the action. Hereupon Hesshusius entered
the public controversy against Calvinism. In 1560 he
published Concerning the Presence (De Praesentia) of the
Body of Christ in the Lord's Supper and his Answer
(Responsio) to the Prejudicial Judgement (Praeiudicium)
of Philip Melanchthon on the Controversy Concerning the
Lord's Supper [with Klebitz].

After the dismissal of Hesshusius, Elector Frederick
III, who had shortly before played a conspicuous role in
endeavoring to win the day for Melanchthonianism at
the Lutheran Assembly of Naumburg, immediately
began to Calvinize his territory. In reading the controversial
books published on the Lord's Supper, he suffered
himself to be guided by the renowned physician
Thomas Erastus [died {{< hiddenanchor 1583 >}}1583{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, who was a Calvinist and
had himself published Calvinistic books concerning the
Lord's Supper and the person and natures of Christ.As
a result the Elector, having become a decided
Reformedist, determined to de-Lutheranize the
Palatinate in every particular, regarding practise and
divine service as well as with respect to confessional
books, doctrines, and teachers. The large number of
Philippists, who had been secret Calvinists before, was
increased by such Reformed theologians as Caspar
Olevianus (1560), Zacharias Ursinus (1561), and
Tremellius (1561). Images, baptismal fonts, and altars
were removed from the churches; wafers were replaced
by bread, which was broken; the organs were closed; the
festivals ofMary, the apostles, and saints were abolished.
Ministers refusing to submit to the new order of things
were deposed and their charges filled with Reformed
men from the Netherlands. The Calvinistic Heidelberg
Catechism, composed by Olevianus and Ursinus and
published 1563 in German and Latin, took the place of
Luther's Catechism. This process of Calvinization was
completed by the introduction of the new Church
Order of November 15, 1563.At the behest of Frederick
III the Swiss Confession (Confessio Helvetica) was published
in 1566, in order to prove by this out-and-out
Zwinglian document, framed by Bullinger,"that he [the
Elector of the Palatinate] entertained no separate doctrine,
but the very same that was preached also in many
other and populous churches, and that the charge was
untrue that the Reformed disagreed among themselves
and were divided into sects." Thus the Palatinate was
lost to the Lutheran Confession, for though Ludwig VI
(1576; 1583), the successor of Frederick III, temporarily
restored Lutheranism, Frederick IV (1583 to 1610)
returned to Calvinism.

#### 211. Saxony in the Grip of Crypto-Calvinists.

It was a severe blow to the Lutheran Church when
Bremen and the Palatinate fell a prey to Calvinism.And
the fears were not unfounded that before long the
Electorate of Saxony would follow in their wake, and
Wittenberg, the citadel of the Lutheran Reformation, be
captured by Calvin. That this misfortune, which, no
doubt, would have dealt a final and fatal blow to
Lutheranism, was warded off, must be regarded as a
special providence of God. For the men (Melanchthon,
Major, etc.) whom Luther had accused of culpable silence regarding
the true doctrine of the Lord's Supper, were, naturally
enough, succeeded by theologians who, while claiming
to be true Lutherans adhering to the Augsburg
Confession and, in a shameful manner deceiving and
misleading Elector August zealously championed and
developed the Melanchthonian aberrations, in particular
with respect to the doctrines concerning the Lord's
Supper and the person of Christ, and sedulously propagated
the views of Calvin, at first secretly and guardedly,
but finally with boldness and abandon. Gieseler says
of these Philippists in Wittenberg: "Inwardly they were
out-and-out Calvinists, although they endeavored to
appear as genuine Lutherans before their master,"
Elector August. (3, 2, 250.)

The most prominent and influential of these socalled
Philippists or Crypto-Calvinists were Dr. Caspar
Cruciger, Jr., Dr. Christopher Pezel, Dr. Frederick
Widebram, and Dr. Henry Moeller. The schemes of
these men were aided and abetted by a number of nontheological
professors: Wolfgang Crell, professor of
ethics, Esrom Ruedinger, professor of philosophy;
George Cracow, professor of jurisprudence and, later,
privy councilor of Elector August; Melanchthon's sonin-
law, Caspar Peucer, professor of medicine and physician
in ordinary of the Elector, who naturally had a
great influence on August and the ecclesiastical affairs of
the Electorate.He held that Luther's doctrine of the real
presence had no more foundation in the Bible than did
the Roman transubstantiation. To these must be added
John Stoessel, confessor to the Elector and superintendent
at Pirna; Christian Schuetze, court-preacher at
Dresden, Andrew Freyhub and Wolfgang Harder professors
in Leipzig, and others. The real leaders of these
Philippists were Peucer and Cracow. Their scheme was
to prepossess the Elector against the loyal adherents of
Luther, especially Flacius, gradually to win him over to
their liberal views, and, at the proper moment, to surrender
and deliver Electoral Saxony to the Calvinists. In
prosecuting this sinister plan, they were unscrupulous
also in the choice of their means.Thus Wittenberg, during
Luther's days the fountainhead of the pure Gospel
and the stronghold of uncompromising fidelity to the
truth, had become a veritable nest of fanatical Crypto-
Calvinistic schemers and dishonest anti-Lutheran plotters
who also controlled the situation in the entire
Electorate.

The first public step to accomplish their purpose
was the publication of the Corpus Doctrinae
Christianae, or Corpus Doctrinae Misnicum, or
Philippicum, as it was also called. This collection of symbolical
books was published 1560 at Leipzig by Caspar
Peucer, Melanchthon's son-in-law, with a preface to
both the German and Latin editions written by
Melanchthon and dated September 29, 1559, and
February 16, 1560, respectively,-an act by which, perhaps
without sufficiently realizing it, Melanchthon
immodestly assumed for himself and his views the place
within the Lutheran Church which belonged not to
him, but to Luther. The title which reveals the insincerity
and the purpose of this publication, runs as follows:
"Corpus Doctrinae, i.e., the entire sum of the true and
Christian doctrine ... as a testimony of the steadfast and
unanimous confession of the pure and true religion in
which the schools and churches of these Electoral Saxon
and Meissen territories have remained and persevered
in all points according to the Augsburg Confession for
now almost thirty years against the unfounded false
charges and accusations of all Iying spirits, 1560." As a
matter of fact, however, this Corpus contained, besides
the Ecumenical Symbols, only writings of
Melanchthon, notably the altered Augsburg Confession
and the altered Apology of 1542, the Saxon Confession
of 1551, the changed Loci, the Examen Ordinandorum
of 1554, and the _Responsiones ad Impios Articulos
Inquisitionis Bavaricae_.

Evidently this Corpus Philippicum, which was
introduced also in churches outside of Electoral Saxony,
particularly where the princes or leading theologians
were Melanchthonians, was intended to alienate the
Electorate from the old teaching of Luther, to sanction
and further the Melanchthonian tendency, and thus to
pave the way for Calvinism. It was foisted upon, and rigorously
enforced in, all the churches of Electoral Saxony.
All professors, ministers, and teachers were pledged by
an oath to teach according to it. Such as refused to subscribe
were deposed, imprisoned, or banished. Among
the persecuted pastors we find the following names:
Tettelbach, superintendent in Chemnitz; George
Herbst, deacon in Chemnitz and later superintendent
in Eisleben; Graf, superintendent in Sangerhausen;
Schade, Heine, and Schuetz, pastors in Freiberg.When
ministers who refused their signatures appealed to
Luther's writings, they were told that Luther's books
must be understood and explained according to
Melanchthon's Corpus.At Wittenberg the opposition to
Luther and his teaching bordered on fanaticism.When,
for example, in 1568 Conrad Schluesselburg and Albert
Schirmer, two Wittenberg students, entered a complaint
against Professors Pezel and Peucer because of their
deviations from Luther in the doctrine of the Lord's
Supper and refused to admit that Peucer and his colleagues
represented the pure doctrine in this matter,
they were expelled from the university, anathematized,
and driven from the city. (Schluesselburg 13, 609. 730;
Gieseler 3, 2, 250.)

Immediately after its appearance, the Corpus
Philippicum was denounced by loyal Lutherans, notably
those of Reuss, Schoenfeld, and Jena.When the charges
of false teaching against the Wittenberg theologians
increased in number and force, Elector August arranged
a colloquy between the theologians of Jena and
Wittenberg. It was held at Altenburg and lasted from
October, 1568, to March, 1569 because the
Wittenbergers, evidently afraid of compromising themselves,
insisted on its being conducted in writing only.
The result of this colloquy was a public declaration on
the part ofWigand, Coelestinus, Kirchner Rosinus, and
others to the effect that the Wittenberg and Leipzig theologians
had unmistakably revealed themselves as false
teachers. At the colloquy the Jena theologians objected
in particular also to the Corpus Misnicum because it
contained the altered Augustana, concerning which they
declared:Melanchthon "has changed the said Augsburg
Confession so often that finally he has opened a window
through which the Sacramentarians and Calvinists can
sneak into it. One must watch carefully, lest in course of
time the Papists also find such a loophole to twist themselves
into it." (Gieseler 3, 2, 252.)

The Philippists of Leipzig and Wittenberg in turn,
denounced the Jena theologians as Flacian fighting
cocks (Flacianische Haderkatzen). They also succeeded
in persuading Elector August to adopt more rigorous
measures against the malcontents in his territories. For
in addition to the adoption of the Corpus Philippicum
the ministers were now required to subscribe to a declaration
which was tantamount to an endorsement of all
of the false doctrines entertained by the Wittenbergers.
The declaration read: "I do not adhere to the dangerous
Flacian Illyrian errors, contentions, poisonous backbitings,
and fanaticism (zaenkischem Geschmeiss, giftigem
Gebeiss und Schwaermer) with which the schools and
churches of this country are burdened [by Flacius] concerning
the imagined adiaphorism, synergism, and
Majorism and other false accusations, nor have I any
pleasure in it [the quarreling], and in the future I intend,
by the help of God, to abstain from it altogether, to
damn, flee, and avoid it, and as much as I am able, to
prevent it." (Gieseler 3, 2, 253;Walther, 49.)

#### 212. Bold Strides Forward.

Feeling themselves firm and safe in the saddle, the
Wittenberg Philippists now decided on further public
steps in the direction of Calvinism. In 1570 they published
Propositions (Propositiones) Concerning the Chief
Controversies of This Time, in which the Lutheran doctrine
regarding the majesty of the human nature of
Christ was repudiated. In the following year they added
a new Catechism, entitled:"Catechesis continens explicationem
simplicem et brevem decalogi, Symboli Apostolici,
orationis dominicae, doctrinae Christianae, quod amplectuntur
ac tuentur Ecclesiae regionum Saxonicarum et
Misnicarum quae sunt subiectae editioni Ducis Electoris
Saxoniae, edita in Academia Witebergensi et accommodata
ad usum scholarum puerilium. 1571."

This Catechism, written, according to Wigand, by
Pezel, appeared anonymously. Its preface, signed by the
Wittenberg theological faculty, explains that the new
Catechism was an epitome of the Corpus Doctrinae
Misnicum and merely intended as a supplement of
Luther's Catechism for progressed scholars who were in
need of additional instruction.As a matter of fact, however,
its doctrine concerning the person of Christ and
the Lord's Supper was in substantial agreement with the
teaching of Calvin.Under the odious name of "ubiquity"
it rejected the omnipresence of Christ according to
His human nature, and sanctioned Calvin's teaching
concerning the local inclusion of Christ in heaven.Acts
3, 21 was rendered in Beza's translation: "Quem oportet
coelo capi.Who must be received by the heaven."

The Catechism declares: "The ascension was visible
and corporeal; the entire Antiquity has always written
that Christ's body is restricted to a certain place, wherever
He wishes it to be; and a bodily ascension was made
upwards. Ascensio fuit visibilis et coporalis, et semper ita
scripsit tota antiquitas, Christum corporali locatione in
aliquo loco esse, ubicumque vult, et ascensio corporalis
facta est sursum." Concerning the real presence, the
Catechism merely states: "The Lord's Supper is the
communication of the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ as it is instituted in the words of the Gospel;
in which eating (sumptione) the Son of God is truly and
substantially present, and testifies that He applies His
benefits to the believers. He also testifies that He has
assumed the human nature for the purpose of making
us, who are ingrafted into Him by faith, His members.
He finally testifies that He wishes to be in the believers,
to teach, quicken and govern them." (Gieseler 3, 2, 263.)
The sacramental union, oral eating and drinking, and
the eating and drinking of the wicked are not mentioned.
Tschackert remarks that every Calvinist would
readily have subscribed to the teaching of this
Catechism. (545.)

When the Wittenberg Catechism was warned
against and designated as Calvinistic by Chemnitz,
Moerlin, and other theologians of Brunswick,
Lueneburg, Mansfeld, Jena, and Halle, the
Wittenbergers answered and endeavored to defend
their position in the so-called Grundfeste, Firm
Foundation, of 1571. It was a coarse and slanderous
publication, as even the title indicates, which reads:
"Firm Foundation of the True Christian Church
Concerning the Person and Incarnation of Our Lord
Jesus Christ against the Modern Marcionites,
Samosatenes, Sabellians, Arians, Nestorians,
Eutychians, and Monothelites among the Flacian
Rabble Published by the Theologians in Wittenberg." In
this Grundfeste the Wittenbergers present the matter as
though the real issue were not the Lord's Supper, but
Christology. They enumerate as heretics also the
"Ubiquitists," including Brenz Andreae, and Chemnitz.
With respect to their own agreement with Calvin, they
remark that their teaching is the doctrine of the early
Church, in which point, they said, also Calvin agreed.
(Tschackert, 546.)

This daring Calvinistic publication again resulted
in numerous protests against the Wittenbergers on the
part of alarmed Lutherans everywhere outside of
Electoral Saxony, which induced Elector August to
require his theologians to deliver at Dresden, October
10, 1571, a definite statement of their faith. The confession
which they presented was entitled: "Brief Christian
and Simple Repetition of the Confession of the Churches
of God in the Territories of the Elector of Saxony
Concerning the Holy Supper," etc. the Consensus
Dresdensis, as the document was called, satisfied the
Elector at least temporarily, and was published also in
Latin and low German. Essentially, however, the indefinite
and dubious language of the Catechism was here
but repeated. Concerning the majesty of Christ the
Dresden Consensus declares that after the resurrection
and ascension the human nature of Christ "was
adorned with higher gifts than all angels and men." In
His ascension, the Consensus continues, Christ "passed
through the visible heavens and occupied the heavenly
dwelling, where He in glory and splendor retains the
essence, property, form,and shape ofHis true body, and
from there He, at the last day, will come again unto
Judgment in great splendor, visibly."

In a similar vague, ambiguous, and misleading
manner Christ's sitting at the right hand of God is spoken
of. Omitting the oral eating and drinking and the
eating and drinking of the wicked, the Consensus states
concerning the Lord's Supper that "in this Sacrament
Christ gives us with the bread and wine His true body
sacrificed for us on the cross, and His true blood shed
for us, and thereby testifies that He receives us,makes us
members of His body, washes us with His blood, presents
forgiveness of sins, and wishes truly to dwell and to
be efficacious in us." (Tschackert, 546.) The opponents
of the Wittenbergers are branded as unruly men, who,
seeking neither truth nor peace, excite offensive disputations
concerning the real presence in the Lord's
Supper as well as with regard to other articles. Their
doctrine of the real communication ("realis seu physica
communicatio") is characterized as a corruption of the
article of the two natures in Christ and as a revamping
of the heresies of the Marcionites, Valentinians,
Manicheans, Samosatenes, Sabellians, Arians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, and Monothelites. (Gieseler 3,
2, 264f.)

#### 213.Apparently Victorious.

All the Crypto-Calvinistic publications of the
Wittenberg and Leipzig Philippists were duly unmasked
by the Lutherans outside of Electoral Saxony, especially
in Northern Germany. Their various opinions were
published at Jena, 1572, under the title: "Unanimous
Confession (Einhelliges Bekenntnis) of Many Highly
Learned Theologians and Prominent Churches 1. concerning
the New Catechism of the New Wittenbergers,
and 2. concerning their New Foundation (Grundfeste),
also 3. concerning their New Confession (Consensus
Dresdensis), thereupon adopted." However, all this and
the repeated warnings that came from every quarter
outside of his own territories, from Lutheran princes as
well as theologians, do not seem to have made the least
impression on Elector August.Yet he evidently was, and
always intended to be a sincere, devoted, true-hearted,
and singleminded Lutheran. When, for example, in
1572 Beza, at the instance of the Wittenberg Philippists,
dedicated his book against Selneccer to Elector August,
the latter advised him not to trouble him any further
with such writings, as he would never allow any other
doctrine in his territory than that of the Augsburg
Confession.However,blind and credulous as he was,and
filled with prejudice and suspicion against Flacius and
the Jena theologians generally, whom he, being the
brother of the usurper Maurice, instinctively feared as
possibly also political enemies, Elector August was easily
duped and completely hypnotized, as it were, by the
men surrounding him, who led him to believe that they,
too, were in entire agreement with Luther and merely
opposed the trouble-breeding Flacians, whom they
never tired of denouncing as zealots, fanatics, bigots,
wranglers, barkers, alarmists, etc. While in reality they
rejected the doctrine that the true body and blood of
Christ is truly and essentially present in the Holy
Supper, these Crypto-Calvinists pretended (and Elector
August believed them) that they merely objected to a
local presence and to a Capernaitic eating and drinking
of the body and blood of Christ in the Holy Supper.
And while in reality they clearly repudiated Luther's
teaching, according to which the divine attributes
(omnipotence, omnipresence, etc.) are communicated
to the human nature of Christ, they caused the Elector
to believe that they merely opposed a delusion of the
"Ubiquitists," who, they said, taught that the body of
Christ was locally extended over the entire universe. This
crass localism, they maintained, was the teaching of
their opponents, while they themselves faithfully
adhered to the teachings of Luther and Philip, and, in
general, were opposed only to the exaggerations and
excrescences advocated by the bigoted Flacians.
(Walther, 43.)

Such was the manner in which the Elector allowed
himself to be duped by the Philippists who surrounded
him,-men who gradually developed the art of dissim-
ulation to premeditated deceit, falsehood, and perjury.
Even the Reformed theologian Simon Stenius, a student
at Wittenberg during the Crypto-Calvinistic period,
charges the Wittenbergers with dishonesty and systematic
dissimulation. The same accusation was raised 1561
by the jurist Justus Jonas in his letters to Duke Albrecht
of Prussia. (Gieseler 3, 2, 249.) And evidently believing
that Elector August could be fooled all the time, they
became increasingly bold in their theological publications,
and in their intrigues as well.

To all practical purposes the University of
Wittenberg was already Calvinized. Calvinistic books
appeared and were popular. Even the work of a Jesuit
against the book of Jacob Andreae on the Majesty of the
Person of Christ was published at Wittenberg.The same
was done with a treatise of Beza, although, in order to
deceive the public, the title-page gave Geneva as the
place of publication.Hans Lufft, the Wittenberg printer,
later declared that during this time he did not know
how to dispose of the books of Luther which he still had
in stock, but that, if he had printed twenty or thirty
times as many Calvinistic books, he would have sold all
of them very rapidly.

Even Providence seemed to bless and favor the
plans of the plotters. For when on March 3, 1573, Duke
John William, the patron and protector of the faithful
Lutherans, died, Elector August became the guardian of
his two sons.And fanaticized by his advisers, the Elector,
immediately upon taking hold of the government in
Ducal Saxony, banished Wigand, Hesshusius, Caspar
Melissander [born 1540; 1571 professor of theology in
Jena; 1578 superintendent in Altenburg; died {{< hiddenanchor 1591 >}}1591{{< /hiddenanchor >}}
Rosinus [born 1520; 1559 superintendent in Weimar
1574 superintendent in Regensburg; died {{< hiddenanchor 1586 >}}1586{{< /hiddenanchor >}},
Gernhard, courtpreacher in Weimar, and more than
100 preachers and teachers of Ducal Saxony.The reason
for this cruel procedure was their refusal to adopt the
Corpus Philippicum, and because they declined to
promise silence with respect to the Philippists.

#### 214."Exegesis Perspicua."

In 1573, the Calvinization of Electoral and Ducal
Saxony was, apparently, an accomplished fact. But the
very next year marked the ignominious downfall and
the unmasking of the dishonest Philippists. For in this
year appeared the infamous Exegesis, which finally
opened the eyes of Elector August. Its complete title ran:
"Exegesis Perspicua et ferme Integra Controversiae de
Sacra Coena-Perspicuous and Almost Complete
Explanation of the Controversy Concerning the Holy
Supper." The contents and make-up of the book as well
as the secret methods adopted for its circulation clearly
revealed that its purpose was to deal a final blow to
Lutheranism in order to banish it forever from Saxony.
Neither the author, nor the publisher, nor the place and
date of publication were anywhere indicated in the
book. The paper bore Geneva mark and the lettering
was French.The prima facie impression was that it came
from abroad.

Before long, however, it was established that the
Exegesis had been published in Leipzig by the printer
Voegelin, who at first also claimed its authorship. But
when the impossibility of this was shown,Voegelin, in a
public hearing, stated that Joachim Curaeus of Silesia, a
physician who had left Saxony and died 1573, was the
author of the book. Valentin Loescher, however, relates
(Historia Motuum 3, 195) that probably Pezel and the
son-in-law of Melanchthon, Peucer, had a hand in it;
that the Crypto-Calvinist Esram Ruedinger [born 1523,
son-in-law of Camerarius, professor of physics in
Wittenberg, died {{< hiddenanchor 1591 >}}1591{{< /hiddenanchor >}} was its real author; that it was
printed at Leipzig in order to keep the real originators of
it hidden, and that, for the same purpose, the Silesian
Candidate of Medicine Curaeus had taken the responsibility
of its authorship upon himself. (Tschackert,
547.)

Self-evidently, the Wittenberg theologians disclaimed
any knowledge of, or any connection with, the
origin of the Exegesis. However, they were everywhere
believed to share its radical teachings, and known to
have spread it among the students of the university, and
suspected also of having before this resorted to tactics
similar to those employed in the Exegesis. As early as
1561, for example, rhymes had secretly been circulated
in Wittenberg, the burden of which was that faith alone
effects the presence of Christ in the Lord's Supper, and
that the mouth receives nothing but natural bread. One
of these ran as follows: "Allein der Glaub' an Jesum
Christ Schafft, dass er gegenwaertig ist, Und speist uns
mit sei'm Fleisch und Blut Und sich mit uns einigen tut.
Der Mund empfaeht natuerlich Brot, Die Seel' aber
speist selber Gott."(Walther, 46.) Of course, the purpose
of such dodgers was to prepare the way for Calvinism.
And on the very face of it, the Exegesis Perspicua was
intended to serve similar secret propaganda.

The chief difference between the preceding publications
of the Philippists and the Exegesis was that here
they came out in clear and unmistakable language. The
sacramental union, the oral eating and drinking (manducatio
oralis), and the eating and drinking of the
wicked,which before were passed by in silence, are dealt
with extensively and repudiated. The Exegesis teaches:
The body of Christ is inclosed in heaven; in the Holy
Supper it is present only according to its efficacy, there is
no union of the body of Christ with the bread and wine;
hence, there neither is nor can be such a thing as oral
eating and drinking or eating and drinking of unbelievers.
The "ubiquity," as the Exegesis terms the omnipresence
of Christ's human nature, is condemned as
Eutychian heresy. The Exegesis declared: "In the use of
the bread and wine the believers by faith become true
and living members of the body of Christ, who is present
and efficacious through these symbols, as through a
ministry inflaming and renewing our hearts by His
Holy Spirit. The unbelieving, however, do not become
partakers, or koinwnoiv, but because of their contempt
are guilty of the body of Christ." (Seeberg, Grundriss
146.)

After fulsome praise of the Reformed, whose doctrine,
the Exegesis says, is in agreement with the symbols
of the ancient Church, and who as to martyrdom surpass
the Lutherans, and after a corresponding depreciation
of Luther, who in the heat of the controversy was
said frequently to have gone too far, the Exegesis recommends
that the wisest thing would be to follow the men
whom God had placed at the side of Luther, and who
had spoken more correctly than Luther. Following
Melanchthon, all might unite in the neutral formula,
"The bread is the communion of the body of Christ,"
avoiding all further definition regarding the ubiquity
[the omnipresence of Christ's human nature] and the
eating of the true body of Christ, until a synod had definitely
decided these matters. (Tschackert, 547.) All
purified churches (all churches in Germany,
Switzerland, etc., purified from Roman errors), the
Exegesis urges,"ought to be in accord with one another;
and this pious concord should not be disturbed on
account of this difference [regarding the Holy Supper].
Let us be united in Christ and discontinue those dangerous
teachings concerning the ubiquity, the eating of
the true body on the part of the wicked, and similar
things. The teachers should agree on a formula which
could not create offense. They should employ the
modes of speech found in the writings of Melanchthon.
It is best to suppress public disputations, and when contentious
men create strife and disquiet among the people,
the proper thing to do, as Philip advised [in his
opinion to the Elector of the Palatinate], is to depose
such persons of either party, and to fill their places with
more modest men. The teachers must promote unity,
and recommend the churches and teachers of the opposite
party." (Walther, 51.) Such was the teaching and the
theological attitude of the Exegesis. It advocated a union
of the Lutherans and the Reformed based on indifferentism,
and a surrender in all important doctrinal
points to Calvinism, the Lutherans merely retaining
their name. This unionistic attitude of the Exegesis has
been generally, also in America, termed
Melanchthonianism.

#### 215. Plotters Unmasked.

The plain and unmistakable language of the
Exegesis cleared the atmosphere, and everywhere dispelled
all doubts as to the real nature of the theological
trend at Wittenberg and Leipzig. Now it was plain to
everybody beyond the shadow of a doubt that Electoral
Saxony was indeed infested with decided Calvinists.
And before long also the web of deceit and falsehood
which they had spun around the Elector was torn into
shreds. The appearance of the Exegesis resulted in a cry
of indignation throughout Lutheran Germany against
the Wittenberg and Leipzig Philippists.Yet, in 1574, only
few books appeared against the document, which,
indeed, was not in need of a special refutation.Wigand
published Analysis of the New Exegesis, and Hesshusius:
Assertion (Assertio) of the True Doctrine Concerning the
Supper, against the Calvinian Exegesis.At the same time
Elector August was again urged by Lutheran princes
notably the King of Denmark and Duke Ludwig of
Wuerttemberg, also by private persons, to proceed
against the Calvinists in his country and not to spare
them any longer. (Gieseler 3, 2, 267.) The aged Count of
Henneberg made it a point to see the Elector personally
in this matter. But there was little need for further
admonitions, for the Exegesis had opened the Elector's
eyes. And soon after its publication discoveries were
made which filled August with deep humiliation and
burning indignation at the base deception practised on
him by the very men whom he had trusted implicitly
and placed in most important positions. By Iying and
deceit the Philippists had for a long period succeeded in
holding the confidence of Elector August; but now the
time for their complete and inglorious unmasking had
arrived.

Shortly after the Exegesis had appeared, Peucer
wrote a letter to the Crypto-Calvinist Christian
Schuetze, then court-preacher in Dresden [who studied
at Leipzig; became superintendent at Chemnitz in 1550,
courtpreacher of Elector August in 1554; when he was
buried, boys threw a black hen over his coffin, crying,
'Here flies the Calvinistic devil;' Joecher, Lexicon 4, {{< hiddenanchor 372 >}}372{{< /hiddenanchor >}},
which he had addressed to the wife of the court-preacher
in order to avoid suspicion. By mistake the letter was
delivered to the wife of the courtpreacher Lysthenius
[born 1532; studied in Wittenberg; became courtpreacher
of Elector August in 1572 and later on his confessor;
opposed Crypto-Calvinism; was dismissed 1590
by Chancellor Crell; 1591 restored to his position in
Dresden, died {{< hiddenanchor 1596 >}}1596{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. After opening the letter and finding
it to be written in Latin, she gave it to her husband,
who, in turn, delivered it to the Elector. In it Peucer
requested Schuetze dexterously to slip into the hands of
Anna, the wife of the Elector, a Calvinistic prayer-book
which he had sent with the letter. Peucer added: "If first
we have Mother Anna on our side, there will be no difficulty
in winning His Lordship [her husband] too."

Additional implicating material was discovered
when Augustus now confiscated the correspondence of
Peucer, Schuetze, Stoessel, and Cracow. The letters
found revealed the consummate perfidy, dishonesty,
cunning, and treachery of the men who had been the
trusted advisers of the Elector, who had enjoyed his
implicit confidence, and who by their falsehoods had
caused him to persecute hundreds of innocent and
faithful Lutheran ministers. The fact was clearly established
that these Philippists had been systematically
plotting to Calvinize Saxony. The very arguments with
which Luther's doctrine of the Lord's Supper and the
Person of Christ might best be refuted were enumerated
in these letters. However, when asked by the Elector
whether they were Calvinists, these self-convicted
deceivers are said to have answered that "they would not
see the face of God in eternity if in any point they were
addicted to the doctrines of the Sacramentarians or
deviated in the least from Dr. Luther's teaching."
(Walther, 56.) The leaders of the conspiracy were incarcerated.
Cracow died in prison, 1575 Stoessel, 1576. It
was as late as 1586 that Peucer regained his liberty,
Schuetze in 1589.

#### 216. Lutheranism Restored.

In all the churches of Saxony thanksgiving services
were held to praise God for the final triumph of genuine
Lutheranism. A memorial coin celebrating the victory
over the Crypto-Calvinists, bearing the date 1574, was
struck at Torgau. The obverse exhibits Elector August
handing a book to Elector John George of
Brandenburg. The inscription above reads: "Conserva
Apud Nos Verbum Tuum, Domine. Preserve Thy Word
among Us, O Lord." Below, the inscription runs:
"Augustus, Dei Gratia Dux Saxionae et Elector.
Augustus, by the Grace of God Duke of Saxony and
Elector." The reverse represents Torgau and its surroundings,
with Wittenberg in the distance. The Elector,
clad in his armor, is standing on a rock bearing the
inscription:"Schloss Hartenfels"(castle at Torgau). In his
right hand he is holding a sword, in his left a balance,
whose falling scale, in which the Child Jesus is sitting,
bears the inscription: "Die Allmacht, Omnipotence."
The lighter and rising pan, in which four Wittenberg
Crypto-Calvinists are vainly exerting themselves to the
utmost in pulling on the chains of their pan in order to
increase its weight, and on the beam of which also the
devil is sitting, is inscribed: "Die Vernunft, Reason."
Above, God appears, saying to the Elector, "Joshua 1, 5.
6: Confide,Non Derelinquam Te.Trust, I will not forsake
thee." Below we read: "Apud Deum Non Est Impossibile
Verbum Ullum, Lucae 1. Conserva Apud Nos Verbum
Tuum, Domine. 1574. Nothing is impossible with God,
Luke 1. Preserve Thy Word among us, Lord. 1574."The
obverse of a smaller medal, also of 1574 shows the bust
of Elector August with the inscription: "Augustus, Dei
Gratia Dux Saxoniae Et Elector." The reverse exhibits a
ship in troubled waters with the crucified Christ in her
expanded sails, and the Elector in his armor and with
the sword on his shoulder, standing at the foot of the
mast. In the roaring ocean are enemies, shooting with
arrows and striking with swords, making an assault
upon the ship. The fearlessness of the Elector is
expressed in the inscription: "Te Gubernatore, Thou
[Christ] being the pilot." Among the jubilee medals of
1617 there is one which evidently, too, celebrates the
victory over Zwinglianism and Calvinism. Its obverse
exhibits Frederick in his electoral garb pointing with
two fingers of his right hand to the name Jehovah at the
head of the medal. At his left Luther is standing with a
burning light in his right hand and pointing with the
forefinger of his left hand to a book lying on a table and
bearing the title: "Biblia Sacra: V[erbum] D[ei] M[anet]
I[n] Ae[ternum]." The reverse represents the Elector
standing on a rock inscribed: "Schloss Hartenfels, Castle
Hartenfels." In his right hand he is holding the sword
and in his left a balance. Under the falling scale, containing
the Child Jesus, we read: "Die Allmacht,
Omnipotence," and under the rising pan, in which the
serpent is Iying: "Die Vernunft, Reason." The marginal
inscription runs."Iosua 1: Confide.Non Derelinquam Te.
Joshua 1: Trust. I will not forsake thee." (Ch. Junker,
Ehrengedaechtnis Dr.M. Luthers, 353. 383.)

Self-evidently, Elector August immediately took
measures also to reestablish in his territories Luther's
doctrine of the Lord's Supper.The beginning was made
by introducing a confession prepared by reliable superintendents
and discussed, adopted, and subscribed at
the Diet of Torgau, September, 1574, and published
simultaneously in German and Latin. Its German title
ran: "Brief Confession (Kurz Bekenntnis) and Articles
Concerning the Holy Supper of the Body and Blood of
Christ, from which may clearly be seen what heretofore
has been publicly taught, believed, and confessed concerning
it in both universities of Leipzig and
Wittenberg, and elsewhere in all churches and schools
of the Elector of Saxony, also what has been rebuked
and is still rebuked as Sacramentarian error and enthusiasm."
The Torgau Confession, therefore, does not
reject the Corpus Doctrinae Misnicum of 1560 nor even
the Consensus Dresdensis of 1571, and pretends that
Melanchthon was in doctrinal agreement with Luther,
and that only a few Crypto-Calvinists had of late been
discovered in the Electorate. This pretense was the chief
reason why the Confession did not escape criticism. In
1575 Wigand published: "Whether the New
Wittenbergers had hitherto always taught harmoniously
and agreeably with the Old, and whether Luther's and
Philip's writings were throughout in entire harmony
and agreement."

As for its doctrine, however, the Torgau Confession
plainly upholds the Lutheran teaching. Article VII contends
that in the distribution of the Lord's Supper the
body and blood of Christ "are truly received also by the
unworthy." Article VIII maintains the "oral eating and
drinking, oris manducatio."Calvin, Beza,Bullinger,Peter
Martyr and the Heidelberg theologians are rejected,and
their names expressly mentioned. On the other hand,
the "ubiquity [local extension] of the flesh of Christ" is
disavowed and a discussion of the mode and possibility
of the presence of the body and blood of Christ is
declined as something inscrutable. The Latin passage
reads: "Ac ne carnis quidem ubiquitatem, aut quidquam,
quod vel veritatem corporis Christi tollat, vel ulli fidei
articulo repugnet, propter praesentiam in Coena fingimus
aut probamus. Denique de modo et possibilitate praesentiae
corporis et sanguinis Domini plane nihil disputamus.
Nam omnia haec imperscrutabilia statuimus." (Gieseler
3, 2, 268.)

Caspar Cruciger, Jr., Henry Moeller, Christopher
Pezel, and Frederick Widebram, who refused to subscribe
the Brief Confession,were first arrested, then, after
subscribing with a qualification, released, but finally
(1574) banished. Widebram and Pezel removed to
Nassau,Moeller to Hamburg, and Cruciger to Hesse.At
Leipzig, Andrew Freyhub, who appealing to the
Consensus Dresdensis, taught that Christ was exalted
according to both natures, that divine properties were
not communicated to His humanity, and that His body
was inclosed in a certain place in heaven was deposed in
1576.

Thus ended the Crypto-Calvinistic drama in
Electoral Saxony. Henceforth such men as Andreae,
Chemnitz, and Selneccer were the trusted advisers of
August, who now became the enthusiastic, devoted, and
self-sacrificing leader of the larger movement for settling
all of the controversies distracting the Lutheran
Church, which finally resulted in the adoption of the
Formula of Concord.

#### 217.Visitation Articles.

Elector August, the stanch defender of genuine
Lutheranism, died 1586. Under his successor, Christian
I, and Chancellor Nicholas Crell, Crypto-Calvinism
once more raised its head in Electoral Saxony.But it was
for a short period only, for Christian I died September
25, 1591, and during the regency of Duke Frederick
William, who acted as guardian of Christian II,
Lutheranism was reestablished. In order effectually and
permanently to suppress the Crypto-Calvinistic
intrigues, the Duke, in February of 1592, ordered a general
visitation of all the churches in the entire Electorate.
For this purpose Aegidius Hunnius [born 1550; 1576
professor in Marburg and later superintendent and professor
in Wittenberg; attended colloquy at Regensburg
1601; wrote numerous books, particularly against
Papists and Calvinists, died {{< hiddenanchor 1603 >}}1603{{< /hiddenanchor >}},Martin Mirus [born
1532, died {{< hiddenanchor 1593 >}}1593{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, George Mylius [born 1544; 1584
expelled from Augsburg because he was opposed to the
Gregorian almanac, since 1585 professor in Wittenberg
and Jena, died {{< hiddenanchor 1607 >}}1607{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, Wolfgang Mamphrasius [born
1557; superintendent in Wurtzen; died {{< hiddenanchor 1616 >}}1616{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, and others,
who were to conduct the visitation, composed the
so-called Visitation Articles which were printed in 1593.
The complete title of these articles runs: "Visitation
Articles in the Entire Electorate of Saxony, together with
the Negative and Contrary Doctrines of the Calvinists
and the Form of Subscription, as Presented to be Signed
by Both Parties."

As a result of the visitation, the Crypto-Calvinistic
professors in Wittenberg and Leipzig were exiled. John
Salmuth [born 1575; court-preacher in Dresden since
1584; died {{< hiddenanchor 1592 >}}1592{{< /hiddenanchor >}} and Prierius, also a minister in
Dresden, were imprisoned. As a bloody finale of the
Crypto-Calvinistic drama enacted in Electoral Saxony,
Chancellor Crell was beheaded, October 9, 1601, after
an imprisonment of ten years. Crell was punished,
according to his epitaph, as "an enemy of peace and a
disturber of the public quiet-hostis pacis et quietis publicae
turbator," or, as Hutter remarks in his Concordia
Concors,"not on account of his religion, but on account
of his manifold perfidy-non ob religionem, sed ob per-
fidiam multiplicem." (448. 1258.) For a long period (till
1836) all teachers and ministers in Electoral Saxony
were required to subscribe also to the Visitation Articles
as a doctrinal norm. Self-evidently they are not an integral
part of the Book of Concord.

