---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XIX.Controversy on Christ's Descent into Hell.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 19
---

#### 218. Luther's Doctrine.

While according to medieval theologians the
descent into hell was regarded as an act by which Christ,
with His soul only, entered the abode of the dead; and
while according to Calvin and the Reformed generally
the descent into hell is but a figurative expression for the
sufferings of Christ, particularly of His soul, on the
cross, Luther, especially in a sermon delivered 1533 at
Torgau, taught in accordance with the Scriptures that
Christ the God-man,body and soul, descended into hell
as Victor over Satan and his host.With special reference
to Ps. 16, 10 and Acts 2, 24. 27, Luther explained: After
His burial the whole person of Christ, the God-man,
descended into hell, conquered the devil, and destroyed
the power of hell and Satan. The mode and manner,
however, in which this was done can no more be comprehended
by human reason than His sitting at the
right hand of the Father, and must therefore not be
investigated, but believed and accepted in simple faith.
It is sufficient if we retain the consolation that neither
hell nor devil are any longer able to harm us.
Accordingly, Luther did not regard the descent into hell
as an act belonging to the state of humiliation, by which
He paid the penalty for our sins, but as an act of exaltation,
in which Christ, as it were, plucked for us the fruits
of His sufferings which were finished when He died
upon the cross.

Luther's sermon at Torgau graphically describes the
descent as a triumphant march of our victorious Savior
into the stronghold of the dismayed infernal hosts.
From it we quote the following: "Before Christ arose
and ascended into heaven, and while yet Iying in the
grave, He also descended into hell in order to deliver
also us from it, who were to be held in it as prisoners ...
However I shall not discuss this article in a profound
and subtle manner, as to how it was done or what it
means to ．descend into hell,' but adhere to the simplest
meaning conveyed by these words, as we must represent
it to children and uneducated people.""Therefore whoever
would not go wrong or stumble had best adhere to
the words and understand them in a simple way as well
as he can. Accordingly, it is customary to represent
Christ in paintings on walls, as He descends, appears
before hell, clad in a priestly robe and with a banner in
His hand, with which He beats the devil and puts him
to flight, takes hell by storm, and rescues those that are
His. Thus it was also acted the night before Easter as a
play for children. And I am well pleased with the fact
that it is painted, played, sung and said in this manner
for the benefit of simple people.We, too, should let it go
at that, and not trouble ourselves with profound and
subtle thoughts as to how it may have happened, since
it surely did not occur bodily inasmuch as He remained
in the grave three days."

Luther continues: "However since we cannot but
conceive thoughts and images of what is presented to us
in words, and unable to think of or understand anything
without such images, it is appropriate and right
that we view it literally, just as it is painted, that He
descends with the banner, shattering and destroying the
gates of hell; and we should put aside thoughts that are
too deep and incomprehensible for us." "But we ought
... simply to fix and fasten our hearts and thoughts on
the words of the Creed,which says:．I believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God,dead,buried, and descended
into hell,' that is, in the entire person,God and man,
with body and soul, undivided,．born of the Virgin, suffered
died, and buried'; in like manner I must not divide
it here either, but believe and say that the same Christ,
God and man in one person, descended into hell but did
not remain in it; as Ps. 16, 10 says ofHim:．Thou wilt not
leave My soul in hell nor suffer Thine Holy One to see
corruption.' By the word ．soul,' He, in accordance with
the language of the Scripture, does not mean, as we do,
a being separated from the body, but the entire man, the
Holy One of God, as He here calls Himself. But how it
may have occurred that the man lies there in the grave,
and yet descends into hell-that, indeed, we shall and
must leave unexplained and uncomprehended; for it
certainly did not take place in a bodily and tangible
manner although we can only paint and conceive it in a
coarse and bodily way and speak of it in pictures."
"Such, therefore is the plainest manner to speak of this
article, that we may adhere to the words and cling to this
main point, that for us, through Christ, hell has been
torn to pieces and the devil's kingdom and power utterly
destroyed, for which purpose He died, was buried,
and descended,-so that it should no longer harm or
overwhelm us, as He Himself says, Matt. 16, 18 ... "
(CONC. TRIGL., 1050, 1.)

#### 219.Aepinus in Hamburg.

The two outstanding features of Luther's sermon
are that Christ descended into hell body and soul, and
that He descended as a triumphant Victor, and not in
order to complete His suffering and the work of atonement.
The denial of these two points, in particular,
caused a new controversy, which however, was of brief
duration only, and practically confined to the city of
Hamburg, hence also called the Hamburg Church
Controversy, der Hamburger Kirchenstreit. Its author
was John Aepinus [Huck or Hoeck; born 1499; studied
under Luther; persecuted in Brandenburg and banished;
rector in Stralsund; 1532 pastor and later superintendent
in Hamburg; wrote 1547 against the Interim;
sided with Flacius against the Philippists; published
books in Latin and Low German; dealt with Christ's
descent to hell especially in his Commentary on Psalm
16, of 1544, and in his Explanation of Psalm 68, of 1553;
died May 13, {{< hiddenanchor 1553 >}}1553{{< /hiddenanchor >}}.

Aepinus taught that Christ's descent is a part of His
suffering and atonement.While the body was Iying in
the grave,His soul descended into hell in order to suffer
the qualms and pangs required to satisfy the wrath of
God, complete the work of redemption, and render a
plenary satisfaction, satisfactio plenaria. The descent is
the last stage of Christ's humiliation and suffering, His
triumph first beginning with the resurrection. Though
we know His sufferings in hell to have been most sad
and bitter, yet we are unable to say and define what they
were in particular, or to describe them concretely,
because Scripture is silent on this question.

But while Aepinus originally held that the soul of
Christ suffered in hell the punishment of eternal death,
he later on distinguished between the first and the second
death (eternal damnation) asserting the suffering
Christ endured in hell to have been a part of the punishment
of the first death, and that He did not suffer the
cruciatus AETERNI TARTAREI IGNIS.-Such were the views
advocated, developed, and variously modified by
Aepinus in his theological lectures and publications.
From the Latin "Consummatum est, It is finished," the
teaching that Christ finished His suffering and the work
of atonement by His death on the cross was stigmatized
by Aepinus as "error consummaticus," and its advocates
as "Consummatists," while these, in turn, dubbed
Aepinus and his adherents "Infernalists." (Frank 3, 440.)

Among the statements of Aepinus are the following:
"I believe that hell is a place prepared by divine justice
to punish the devils and wicked men according to
the quality of their sins." (437.) "On account of our
redemption Christ descended to hell, just as He suffered
and died for us." (437.) "Theologians who either deny
that the soul of Christ descended into hell, or say that
Christ was present in hell only in effect and power, and
not by His presence, deprive the Church of faith in the
sufficient, complete, and perfect satisfaction and
redemption of Christ and leave to Satan the right over
pious souls after their separation from the body. For by
denying that Christ sustained and bore those punishments
of death and hell which the souls were obliged to
bear after their separation from the body, they assert
that complete satisfaction has not been made for them."
(439.) "I believe that the descent of the soul of Christ to
hell is a part of the Passion of Christ, i.e., of the struggles,
dangers, anguish, pains, and punishments which
He took upon Himself and bore in our behalf; for, in the
Scriptures, to descend to hell signifies to be involved in
the highest struggles, pain, and distress. I believe that the
descent of Christ to hell is a part of His obedience foretold
by the prophets and imposed on Him because of
our sins."(440.) "I believe that the descent of Christ pertains
to His humiliation, not to His glorification and triumph."
(441.) "The descent to hell was by God's judgment
laid upon Christ as the last degree of His humiliation
and exinanition and as the extreme part of His
obedience and satisfaction." (441.) "Peter clearly teaches,
Acts 2, that the soul of Christ felt the pangs of hell
and death while His body was resting in the sepulcher."
(441.) "What Christ experienced when He descended
into hell is known to Himself, not to us; may we
acknowledge and accept with grateful minds that He
descended into hell for us. But let us not inquire what it
was that He experienced for us in His descent, for we
may piously remain ignorant of matters which God did
not reveal to His Church, and which He does not
demand that she know." (444.)

#### 220. Opposed by His Colleagues.

The views of Aepinus, first presented in lectures
delivered 1544 before the ministers of Hamburg, called
forth dissent and opposition on the part of his colleagues.
Before long, however (1549), the controversy
began to assume a virulent character.While the conduct
of Aepinus was always marked by dignity, moderation,
and mildness, his opponents Tileman Epping, John
Gartz, and Caspar Hackrott, ventilated and assailed his
teaching in their pulpits.

The chief argument against Aepinus was that his
doctrine conflicted with, and invalidated, the words of
Christ, "It is finished,""To-day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise."Aepinus rejoined that the word "to-day" is an
ambiguous term, denoting both the immediate presence
and the indefinite near future (pro praesenti et
imminente tempore indefinito). (414.) However, it was
not in every respect Luther's position which was occupied
by some of the opponents of Aepinus. Gratz is
reported to have taught that the article concerning the
descent of Christ was not necessary to salvation that
descendere (descend) was identical with sepeliri (to be
buried), that the descent to hell referred to the anguish
and temptation of Christ during His life; that Christ
immediately after His death entered paradise together
with the malefactor, that the work of atonement and
satisfaction was completed with His death. (446.)

In 1550 the city council of Hamburg asked
Melanchthon for his opinion. But Melanchthon's
answer of September, 1550, signed also by Bugenhagen,
was rather indefinite, vague, and evasive. He said, in
substance: Although we have frequently heard the
Reverend Doctor Luther speak on this matter and read
his writings, yet, since a controversy has now been
raised, we have written also to others for their views, in
order to present a unanimous opinion, and thus avoid
dissensions later on. In his Commentary on Genesis and
in his Torgau sermon, Luther referred Descent only to
the victory of the Son of God, indicating that the rest
must not be searched out. The Son of God did indeed
overcome the torments of hell; but the Psalms show that
the pains of hell are not to be restricted only to the time
after the separation of the soul (dolores inferorum non
restringendos esse tantum ad tempus post animae separationem).
Luther, said Melanchthon, expressed it as his
opinion "that this article concerning the Descent must
be retained even when referred only to the victory of
Christ, confessing that the tyranny of the devil and hell
is destroyed i.e., that all who believe in Christ are liberated
from the power of the devil and hell, according to
the word: ．No one shall pluck My sheep out of My
hands.'And in a certain way the Son of God manifested
this victory to the devils, and, no doubt, the devils felt
that their power was broken by this Victor, and that the
head of the serpent was truly bruised by the Seed of the
Woman, by Christ God and man.And among the signs
of His victory was the resurrection of many dead."With
respect to the controverted point, concerning the sufferings
of the soul of Christ after its separation from the
body, Melanchthon advised that the council of
Hamburg "enjoin both parties to await the opinions of
others also, and in the mean time to avoid mentioning
this question in sermons, schools, or other public meetings."
Not the article concerning the Descent itself, but
"only the investigation of this particular point, concerning
the suffering of His departed soul in hell, is to be
omitted, an inquiry which also Dr. Luther did not consider
necessary." (C. R. 7, 667.)

Before this Melanchthon had written in a similar
vein of compromise to Aepinus and his colleague, John
Gartz. "I wish," said he in a letter of April 4, 1550, "that
there would be an amnesty between you in this entire
strife" about the descent of Christ. "Let us cultivate
peace with one another, and cover up certain wounds of
ours, lest sadder disputations originate." (7, 569; compare
6, 116.) In the following year the Hamburg
Council, acting on the advice ofMelanchthon, deposed
and expelled the leaders of the opposition to Aepinus,
which, however, was not intended as a decision in favor
of the doctrine of Aepinus, but merely as a measure to
restore peace and silence in the city.

#### 221. Other Participants in This Controversy.

Though the controversy was suppressed in
Hamburg, and Aepinus died May 13, 1553, the theological
questions involved were not settled, nor had all of
the advocates of the views set forth by Aepinus disappeared
from the scene. Even such theologians as
Westphal, Flacius, Gallus, and Osiander were partly
agreed with him. Osiander says in an opinion: "I am
asked whether the descent of Christ pertains to the satisfaction
made for us or only to His triumph over the
enemies. I answer briefly that the descent of Christ into
hell pertained to the satisfaction He merited for us as
well as to the triumph over the enemies, just as His
death on the cross does not belong to the one only, but
to both ...Thus by descending into hell He rendered satisfaction
for us who merited hell, according to Ps. 16."
On the other hand, a synod held July 11, 1554, at
Greifswald made it a point expressly to deny that the
descent of Christ involved any suffering of His soul, or
that it was of an expiatory nature, or that this article
referred to the anguish of His soul before His death, or
that it was identical with His burial. They affirmed the
teaching of Luther, viz., that the entire Christ, God and
man, body and soul, descended into hell after His burial
and before His resurrection, etc. (Frank, 446f.; 416.)

Furthermore, in a letter to John Parsimonius,
court-preacher in Stuttgart, dated February 1, 1565
John Matsperger of Augsburg taught that, in the article
of the descent of Christ, the word "hell" must not be
taken figuratively for torments, death, burial, etc., but
literally, as the kingdom of Satan and the place of the
damned spirits and souls wherever that might be, that
the entire Christ descended into this place according to
both divinity and humanity, with His body and soul,
and not only with the latter,while the former remained
in the grave; that this occurred immediately after His
vivification or the reunion of body and soul in the grave
and before His resurrection; that the Descent was
accomplished in an instant, viz., in the moment after
His vivification and before His resurrection; and that
Christ descended, not to suffer, but, as a triumphant
Victor, to destroy the portals of hell for all believers.
Parsimonius, too, maintained that Christ did not in any
way suffer after His death, but denied emphatically that
"hell" was a definite physical locality or place in space,
and that the descent involved a local motion of the
body. Brenz assented to the views of Parsimonius, and
the preachers of Augsburg also assented to them. In
order to check his zeal against his opponents,
Matsperger was deposed and imprisoned. (Frank, 450 f.)

Such being the situation within the Lutheran
Church concerning the questions involved in the
Hamburg Controversy, which by the way, had been
mentioned also in the Imperial Instruction for the Diet
at Augsburg, 1555, the Formula of Concord considered it
advisable to pass also on this matter. It did so, in Article
IX, by simply reproducing what Luther had taught in
the sermon referred to above.Here we read:"We simply
believe that the entire person, God and man after the
burial, descended into hell, conquered the devil,
destroyed the power of hell and took from the devil all
his might." (1051, 3.) "But how this occurred we should
[not curiously investigate, but] reserve until the other
world, where not only this point [this mystery], but also
still others will be revealed, which we here simply
believe, and cannot comprehend with our blind reason."
(827, 4.) Tschackert remarks: "Ever since [the
adoption of the Ninth Article of the Formula of
Concord] Lutheran theology has regarded the Descent
of Christ as the beginning of the state of exaltation of
the human nature of the God-man." (559.)

