---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XX. The Eleventh Article of the Formula of Concord - On Predestination.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 20
---

#### 222.Why Article XI was Embodied in the Formula.

The reason why Article XI was embodied in the
Formula of Concord is stated in the opening paragraph
of this article: "Although among the theologians of the
Augsburg Confession there has not occurred as yet any
public dissension whatever concerning the eternal election
of the children of God that has caused offense, and
has become wide-spread, yet since this article has been
brought into very painful controversy in other places,
and even among our theologians there has been some
agitation concerning it; moreover, since the same
expressions were not always employed concerning it by
the theologians: therefore in order, by the aid of divine
grace, to prevent disagreement and separation on its
account in the future among our successors, we, as
much as in us lies, have desired also to present an explanation
of the same here, so that every one may know
what is our unanimous doctrine, faith, and confession
also concerning this article." (1063, 1.)

The statements contained in these introductory
remarks are in agreement with the historical facts. For,
while serious dissensions pertaining to election did
occur in Reformed countries, the Lutheran Church,
ever since the great conflict with Erasmus on free will, in
1525 had not been disturbed by any general, public, and
offensive controversy on this question, neither ad intra
among themselves, nor ad extra with the Calvinists.
Hence the chief purpose for embodying Article XI in
the Formula was not to settle past or present disputes,
but rather, as stated in the paragraph quoted, to be of
service in avoiding future differences and conflicts.

This earnest concern for the future peace of our
Church, as well as for the maintenance of its doctrinal
purity, was partly due to apprehensions, which, indeed,
were not without foundation. As a matter of fact, long
before the Formula was drafted, the theological atmosphere
was surcharged with polemical possibilities and
probabilities regarding predestination,-a doctrine
which is simple enough as long as faith adheres to the
plain Word of God, without making rationalistic and
sophistical inferences, but which in public controversies
has always proved to be a most intricate, crucial, and
dangerous question.

Calvin and his adherents boldly rejected the universality
of God's grace, of Christ's redemption, and of
the Spirit's efficacious operation through the means of
grace, and taught that, in the last analysis, also the eternal
doom of the damned was solely due to an absolute
decree of divine reprobation (in their estimation the
logical complement of election), and this at the very
time when they pretended adherence to the Augsburg
Confession and were making heavy inroads into
Lutheran territory with their doctrine concerning the
Lord's Supper and the person of Christ,-which in itself
was sufficient reason for a public discussion and determined
resentment of their absolute predestinarianism.
The Synergists, on the other hand, had long ago been
busy explaining that the only way to escape the Stoic
dogma of Calvinism, and to account for the difference
why some are accepted and elected, while the rest are
rejected, was to assume a different conduct in man-
aliqua actio dissimilis in homine. And as for their
Lutheran opponents, it cannot be denied that some of
their statements were not always sufficiently guarded to
preclude all misapprehensions and false inferences.

Thus controversial material had been everywhere
heaped up in considerable quantities. Considering these
factors, which for decades had been making for a theological
storm, one may feel rather surprised that a controversy
on predestination had not arisen long ago.
Tschackert says: "They [the Lutheran theologians] evidently
feared an endless debate if the intricate question
concerning predestination were made a subject of discussion."
(559.) Sooner or later, however, the conflict
was bound to come with dire results for the Church,
unless provisions were made to escape it, or to meet it in
the proper way.Well aware of this entire critical situation
and the imminent dangers lurking therein, the
framers of the Formula of Concord wisely resolved to
embody in it also an article on election in order to clear
the theological atmosphere, maintain the divine truth,
ward off a future controversy, and insure the peace of
our Church.

#### 223.Unguarded Statements of Anti-Synergists.

That the occasional dissimilar and inadequate references
to eternal election and related subjects made by
some opponents of the Synergists were a matter of grave
concern to the authors of the Formula of Concord
appears from the passage quoted from Article XI, enumerating,
among the reasons why the article on predestination
was embodied in the Formula, also the fact that
"the same expressions were not always employed concerning
it [eternal election] by the theologians." These
theologians had staunchly defended the sola gratia doctrine,
but not always without some stumbling in their
language. In their expositions they had occasionally
employed phrases which, especially when torn from
their context, admitted a synergistic or Calvinistic interpretation.
The framers of the Formula probably had in
mind such inadequate and unguarded statements of
Bucer,Amsdorf, and others as the following.

Bucer had written: "The Scriptures do not hesitate
to say that God delivers some men into a reprobate
mind and drives them to perdition. Why, then, is it
improper to say that God has afore-determined to
deliver these into a reprobate mind and to drive them to
perdition? Scriptura non veretur dicere, Deum tradere
quosdam homines in sensum reprobum et agere in perniciem.
Quid igitur indignum Deo, dicere, etiam statuisse
antea, ut illos in sensum reprobum traderet et ageret in
perniciem" (Frank 4, 264.) The Formula of Concord,
however, is careful to explain:"Moreover, it is to be diligently
considered that when God punishes sin with sins,
that is, when He afterwards punishes with obduracy
and blindness those who had been converted, because
of their subsequent security, impenitence, and wilful
sins this should not be interpreted to mean that it never
had been God's good pleasure that such persons should
come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved."
(1001, 83.)

Brenz had said:"To the one of the entire mass of the
human race God gives faith in Christ, whereby he is justified
and saved, while He leaves the other in his
incredulity that he may perish. Deus ex universa generis
humani massa alteri quidem donat fidem in Christum,
qua iustificetur et salvetur, alterum autem relinquit in sua
incredulitate, ut pereat." (Frank 4, 256.) Again: It was
God's will to elect Jacob and to leave Esau in his sin.
What is said of these two must be understood of the
election and rejection of all men in general. "Potuisset
Deus optimo iure ambos abiicere; ... sed sic proposuerat
Deus, sic visum est Deo, sic erat voluntas Dei, sic erat bene
placitum Dei, ut Iacobum eligeret, Esau autem in peccato
suo relinqueret; quod de his duobus dictum est, hoc intelligendum
erit generaliter de omnium hominum electione
et abiectione." (256.) Hesshusius: "In this respect God
does not will that all be saved, for He has not elected all.
Hoc respectu Deus non vult, ut omnes salventur; non
enim omnes elegit." (Schluesselburg 5, 320. 548.) Such
statements, when torn from their context, gave color to
the inference that God's grace was not universal. The
Formula of Concord, therefore, carefully urges that God
earnestly endeavors to save all men, also those who are
finally lost, and that man alone is the cause of his
damnation.

In his Sententia de Declaratione Victorini of 1562
Nicholas Amsdorf said: "God has but one mode of
working in all creatures ... Therefore God works in the
same way in man who has a will and intellect as in all
other creatures, rocks and blocks included, viz., through
His willing and saying alone ... As rocks and blocks are
in the power of God, so and in the same manner man's
will and intellect are in the will of God, so that man can
will and choose absolutely nothing else than what God
wills and says, be it from grace or from wrath. Non est
nisi unus modus agendi Dei cum omnibus creaturis ...
Quare eodem modo cum homine volente et intelligente
agit Deus, quemadmodum cum omnibus creaturis
reliquis, lapide et trunco, per solum suum velle et dicere ...
Sicut lapides et trunci sunt in potestate Dei, ita et eodem
modo voluntas et intellectus hominis sunt in voluntate
Dei, ut homo nihil prorsus velle et eligere possit nisi id,
quod vult et dicit Deus, sive ex gratia, sive ex ira, derelinquens
eum in manu consilii eius." (Schlb. 5, 547; Gieseler
3, 2, 230; Frank 4, 259.) This, too, was not embodied in
the Formula of Concord, which teaches that, although
man before his conversion has no mode of working
anything good in spiritual things, God nevertheless has
a different way of working in rational creatures than in
irrational and that man is not coerced, neither in his
sinning nor in his conversion. (905, 60ff.)

#### 224. Synergistic Predestination.

The connection between the doctrines of conversion
and election is most intimate. A correct presentation
of the former naturally leads to a correct presentation
of the latter, and vice versa. Hence Melanchthon,
the father of synergism in conversion, was also the
author of a synergistic predestination. In his first period
he speaks of predestination as Luther did, but, as Frank
puts it, "with less of mysticism conformably to reason,
following the same line of thought as Zwingli (mit
weniger Mystik, auf verstandesmaessige, Zwinglis
Ausfuehrungen aehnliche Weise." (1, 125; C. R. 21, 88.
93.) In reality he probably had never fully grasped the
truly religious and evangelical view of Luther, which,
indeed, would account for his later synergistic deviations
as well as for the charges of Stoicism he preferred
against Luther. After abandoning his former doctrine,
he, as a rule, was noncommittal as to his exact views on
election. But whenever he ventured an opinion, it
savored of synergism. September 30, 1531, he wrote to
Brenz: "But in the entire Apology I have avoided that
long and inexplicable disputation concerning predestination.
Everywhere I speak as though predestination
follows our faith and works.And this I do intentionally,
for I do not wish to perturb consciences with these inexplicable
labyrinths. Sed ego in tota Apologia fugi illam
longam et inexplicabilem disputationem de praedestinatione.
Ubique sic loquor, quasi praedestinatio sequatur
nostram fidem et opera. Ac facio hoc certo consilio; non
enim volo conscientias perturbare illis inexplicabilibus
labyrinthis." (C. R. 2, 547.)

In the third, revised edition of his Explanation of the
Epistle to the Romans, 1532, he suggests "that divine
compassion is truly the cause of election, but that there
is some cause also in him who accepts, namely, in as far
as he does not repudiate the grace offered. Verecundius
est, quod aliquamdiu placuit Augustino, misericordiam
Dei vere causam electionis esse, sed tamen eatenus aliquam
causam in accipiente esse, quatenus promissionem
oblatam non repudiat, quia malum ex nobis est."
(Gieseler 3, 2, 192; Seeberg 4, 2, 442.) In an addition to
his Loci in 1533,Melanchthon again speaks of a cause of
justification and election residing in man, in order to
harmonize the statements that the promise of the
Gospel is both gratis and universal. (C. R. 21, 332.) In
the Loci edition of 1543 we read: "God elected because
He had decreed to call us to the knowledge of His Son,
and desires His will and benefits to be known to the
human race. He therefore approves and elected those
who obey the call. Elegit Deus, quia vocare nos ad Filii
agnitionem decrevit et vult generi humano suam voluntatem
et sua beneficia innotescere. Approbat igitur ac elegit
obtemperantes vocationi." (21, 917.)

The bold synergistic views concerning conversion
later on developed by Melanchthon plainly involve the
doctrine that there must be in man a cause of discrimination
why some are elected while others are rejected.
In his Loci of 1548 he had written: "Since the promise is
universal, and since there are no contradictory wills in
God, some cause of discrimination must be in us why
Saul is rejected and David accepted (cur Saul abiiciatur
David recipiatur), that is, there must be some dissimilar
action in these two." (21, 659.) Self-evidently
Melanchthon would not have hesitated to replace the
phrase "why Saul was rejected and David accepted,"
with "why Saul was rejected and David elected."

Melanchthon held that the sole alternative of and
hence the only escape from, the doctrine of absolute
necessity (Stoica ajnavgkh) and from the absolute decree,
which makes God responsible also for sin and eternal
damnation, was the synergistic assumption of man's
"ability to apply himself to grace-facultas applicandi se
ad gratiam." Accordingly, as he dubbed those who
opposed his Calvinizing views on the Lord's Supper as
"bread-worshipers," so he stigmatized as Stoics all
Lutherans who opposed his synergistic tendencies. (C.
R. 8, 782. 783. 916; 9, 100. 565. 733; 23, 392.) Seeberg
summarizes Melanchthon's doctrine as follows: "Grace
alone saves, but it saves by imparting to man the freedom
to decide for himself. This synergistic element
reappears in his doctrine of election." (4, 2, 446.) "God
elects all men who desire to believe." (Grundriss, 144.)

Naturally the Synergists of Wittenberg and other
places followed Master Philip also in the doctrine of
election. In 1555, John Pfeffinger declared in his
Quaestiones Quinque (extensively quoted from in the
chapter on the Synergistic Controversy), thesis 17: "If
the will were idle or purely passive [in conversion], there
would be no distinction between the pious and the
impious, or the elect and the damned, as between Saul
and David, between Judas and Peter. God would
become a respecter of persons and the author of contu-
macy in the wicked and damned.Moreover, contradictory
wills would be ascribed to God which conflicts with
the entire Scripture. Hence it follows that there is in us
some cause why some assent while others do not
assent." Thesis 23: "For we are elected and received
because we believe in the Son. (Ideo enim electi sumus et
recepti, quia credimus in Filium.) But our apprehension
must concur. For since the promise of grace is universal,
and we must obey the promise, it follows that between
the elect and the rejected some difference must be
inferred from our will, viz. that those are rejected who
resist the promise while contrariwise those are accepted
who embrace the promise."

The Synergists argued: If in every respect grace
alone is the cause of our salvation, conversion, and election,
grace cannot be universal. Or, since man's contempt
of God's Word is the cause of his reprobation,
man's acceptance of God's grace must be regarded as a
cause of his election. Joachim Ernest of Anhalt, for
instance, in a letter to Landgrave William of Hesse,
dated April 20, 1577, criticized the Formula of Concord
for not allowing and admitting this argument. (Frank 4,
135. 267.)

#### 225. Calvinistic Predestination.

While the Synergists, in answering the question
why only some are saved, denied the sola gratia and
taught a conversion and predestination conditioned by
the conduct of man, John Calvin and his adherents, on
the other hand, made rapid progress in the opposite
direction, developing with increasing clearness and
boldness an absolute, bifurcated predestination, i.e., a
capricious election to eternal damnation as well as to
salvation, and in accordance therewith denied the universality
of God's grace, of Christ's redemption, and of
the efficacious operation of the Holy Spirit through the
means of grace. In his "lnstitutio Religionis Christianae,
Instruction in the Christian Religion," of which the first
edition appeared 1535, the second in 1539, and the third
in 1559, Calvin taught that God created and foreordained
some to eternal life, others to eternal damnation.
Man's election means that he has been created for eternal
life, man's reprobation, that he has been created for
eternal damnation. We read (Lib. 3, cap. 21, 5):
"Praedestinationem vocamus aeternum Dei decretum,
quo apud se constitutum habuit, quid de unoquoque
homine fieri vellet. Non enim pari conditione creantur
omnes; sed aliis vita aeterna, aliis damnatio aeterna praeordinatur.
Itaque prout in alterutrum finem quisque conditus
est, ita vel ad vitam, vel ad mortem praedestinatum
dicimus." (Tholuck, Calvini Institutio 2, 133.) In the edition
of 1559 Calvin says that eternal election illustrates
the grace of God by showing "that He does not adopt all
promiscuously unto the hope of salvation, but bestows
on some what He denies to others-quod non omnes
promiscue adoptat in spem salutis, sed dat aliis, quod aliis
negat." (Gieseler 3 2, 172.) Again: "I certainly admit that
ail the sons of Adam have fallen by the will of God into
the miserable condition of bondage, in which they are
now fettered; for, as I said in the beginning, one must
always finally go back to the decision of the divine will
alone, whose cause is hidden in itself. Fateor sane, in
hanc qua nunc illigati sunt conditionis miseriam Dei voluntate
cecidisse universos filios Adam; atque id est, quod
principio dicebam, redeundum tandem semper esse ad
solum divinae voluntatis arbitrium, cuius causa sit in ipso
abscondita." (173.) Calvin's successor in Geneva,
Theodore Beza, was also a strict supralapsarian. At the
colloquy of Moempelgard (Montbeliard), 1586, in disputing
with Andreae, he defended the proposition "that
Adam had indeed of his own accord fallen into these
calamities, yet, nevertheless, not only according to the
prescience, but also according to the ordination and
decree of God-sponte quidem, sed tamen non modo
praesciente, sed etiam iuste ordinante et decernente Deo."
(186.) "There never has been, nor is, nor will be a time,"
said he, "when God has wished, wishes, or will wish, to
have compassion on every individual person. Nullum
tempus fuit vel est vel erit, quo voluerit, velit aut voliturus
sit Deus singulorum misereri." (Pieper, Dogm. 2, 25. 50.)

In foisting his doctrine of election on the Reformed
churches,Calvin met with at least some opposition.The
words in the paragraph of the Formula of Concord quoted
above: "Yet, since this article [of predestination] has
been brought into very painful controversy in other
places," probably refer to the conflicts in Geneva and
Switzerland. October 16, 1551, Jerome Bolsec [a
Carmelite in Paris, secretly spread Pelagianism in
Geneva; sided with the Protestants in Paris and Orleans
after his banishment from Geneva; reembraced
Romanism when persecution set in; wrote against
Calvin and Beza, died {{< hiddenanchor 1584 >}}1584{{< /hiddenanchor >}} was imprisoned in Geneva
because of his opposition to Calvin's doctrine of predestination.
Melanchthon remarks in a letter of
February 1, 1552: "Laelius [Socinus] wrote me that in
Geneva the struggle concerning the Stoic necessity is so
great that a certain one who dissented from Zeno
[Calvin] was incarcerated.What a miserable affair! The
doctrine of salvation is obscured by disputations foreign
to it." (C. R. 7, 932.) Although the German cantons
(Zurich, Bern, Basel) advised moderation, Bolsec was
banished from Geneva,with the result however, that he
continued his agitation against Calvin in other parts of
Switzerland. In Bern all discussions on predestination
were prohibited by the city council. Calvin complained
in a letter of September 18, 1554: "The preachers of
Bern publicly declare that I am a heretic worse than all
the Papists." (Gieseler 3, 2, 178.) January 26, 1555, the
council of Bern renewed its decree against public doctrinal
discussions, notably those on predestination-
"principalement touchant la matiere de la divine predestination,
qui nous semble non etre necessaire," etc. (179.)
Later on the doctrine of Calvin was opposed by the
Arminians from Semi-Pelagian principles.

#### 226. Calvinistic Confessions.

The essential features of Calvin's doctrine of predestination
were embodied in most of the Reformed
confessions. The Consensus Genevensis of January 1,
1552, written by Calvin against Albert Pighius [a fanatical
defender of Popery against Luther, Bucer, Calvin;
died December 26, {{< hiddenanchor 1542 >}}1542{{< /hiddenanchor >}} and adopted by the pastors of
Geneva, is entitled: "Concerning God's Eternal
Predestination, by which He has elected some to salvation
and left the others to their perdition-qua in
salutem alios ex hominibus elegit, alios suo exitio reliquit."
(Niemeyer, Collectio Confessionum, 218. 221.) The
Confessio Belgica, of 1559, and the Confessio Gallicana,
of 1561, teach the same absolute predestinarianism. In
Article XVI of the Belgic Confession we read: In predestination
God proved Himself to be what He is in reality,
viz., merciful and just. "Merciful by liberating and
saving from damnation and perdition those whom ...
He elected; just, by leaving the others in their fall and in
the perdition into which they precipitated themselves.
Iustum vero, alios in illo suo lapsu et perditione relinquendo,
in quam sese ipsi praecipites dederunt."
(Niemeyer, 370.) The Gallic Confession [prepared by
Calvin and his pupil, De Chandieu; approved by a
synod at Paris 1559; delivered by Beza to Charles IX,
1561, translated into German 1562, and into Latin,
1566; adopted 1571 by the Synod of La Rochelle] maintains
that God elected some but left the others in their
corruption and damnation. In Article XII we read: "We
believe that from this corruption and general damnation
in which all men are plunged, God, according to
His eternal and immutable counsel, calls those whom
He has chosen by His goodness and mercy alone in our
Lord Jesus Christ,without consideration of their works,
to display in them the riches of His mercy, leaving the
rest in this same corruption and condemnation to show
in them His justice. Credimus ex hac corruptione et
damnatione universali, in qua omnes homines natura
sunt submersi, Deum alios quidem eripere, quos videlicet
aeterno et immutabili suo consilio sola sua bonitate et
misericordia, nulloque operum ipsorum respectu in Iesu
Christo elegit; alios vero in ea corruptione et damnatione
relinquere, in quibus nimirum iuste suo tempore
damnandis iustitiam suam demonstret, sicut in aliis divitias
misericordiae suae declarat." (Niemeyer, 332; Schaff
3, 366.)

The Formula Consensus Helveticae of 1675 says,
canon 13: "As from eternity Christ was elected Head,
Leader, and Heir of all those who in time are saved by
His grace, thus also in the time of the New Covenant He
has been the Bondsman for those only who by eternal
election were given to Him to be His peculiar people,
seed, and heredity. Sicut Christus ab aeterno electus est ut
Caput,Princeps et Haeres omnium eorum, qui in tempore
per gratiam eius salvantur, ita etiam in tempore Novi
Foederis Sponsor factus est pro iis solis qui per aeternam
electionem dati ipsi sunt ut populus peculii, semen et
haereditas eius," etc. (Niemeyer, 733.)

The same Calvinistic doctrines were subsequently
embodied in the Canons of the Synod of Dort, promulgated
May 6, 1619, and in the Westminster Confession
of Faith, published 1647. In the former we read: "That
some receive the gift of faith from God, and others do
not receive it, proceeds from God's eternal election ...
According to His just judgment He leaves the non-elect
to their own wickedness and obduracy." (Schaff 3, 582.)
"The elect, in due time, though in various degrees and
in different measures, attain the assurance of this eternal
and unchangeable election, not by inquisitively prying
into the secret and deep things of God, but by observing
in themselves,with a spiritual joy and holy pleasure,
the infallible fruits of election pointed out in the Word
of God, such as a true faith in Christ, filial fear, a godly
sorrow for sin, a hungering and thirsting after righteousness,
etc." (583.) "Not all, but some only, are elected,
while others are passed by in the eternal decree;
whom God, out of His sovereign, most just, irreprehensible,
and unchangeable good pleasure, hath decreed to
leave in the common misery into which they have wilfully
plunged themselves, and not to bestow upon them
saving faith and the grace of conversion." ... (584.) "For
this was the sovereign counsel and most gracious will
and purpose of God the Father, that the quickening and
saving efficacy of the most precious death of His Son
should extend to all the elect, for bestowing upon them
alone the gift of justifying faith, thereby to bring them
infallibly to salvation; that is, it was the will of God that
Christ by the blood of the cross whereby He confirmed
the New Covenant should effectually redeem out of
every people, tribe, nation, and language all those, and
those only, who were from eternity chosen to salvation,
and given to Him by the Father." (587.) "But God, who
is rich in mercy, according to His unchangeable purpose
of election, does not wholly withdraw the Holy Spirit
from His own people, even in their melancholy falls,nor
suffer them to proceed so far as to lose the grace of
adoption and forfeit the state of justification," etc.
(Schaff 3, 593; Niemeyer, 716.)

The Westminster Confession declares: "By the
decree of God, for the manifestation of His glory, some
men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life,
and others foreordained to everlasting death." (Schaff 3,
608.) "As God hath appointed the elect unto glory, so
hath He, by the eternal and most free purpose of His
will, foreordained all the means thereunto. Wherefore
they who are elected being fallen in Adam, are
redeemed by Christ are effectually called unto faith in
Christ by His Spirit working in due season; are justified,
adopted, sanctified, and kept by His power through
faith unto salvation.Neither are any other redeemed by
Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified,
and saved but the elect only." (609.) "The rest of
mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable
counsel of His own will, whereby He extends or
withholds mercy as He pleases for the glory of His sovereign
power over His creatures, to pass by, and to
ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the
praise ofHis glorious justice."(610;Niemeyer,Appendix
6. 7.)

#### 227.Marbach and Zanchi in Strassburg.

In view of the situation portrayed in the preceding
paragraphs, it is certainly remarkable that a general
public controversy, particularly with the Calvinists and
Synergists had not been inaugurated long before the
Formula of Concord was able to write that such a conflict
had not yet occurred. Surely the powder required for a
predestinarian conflagration was everywhere stored up
in considerable quantities,within as well as without the
Lutheran Church. Nor was a local skirmish lacking
which might have served as the spark and been welcomed
as a signal for a general attack. It was the conflict
between Marbach and Zanchi, probably referred to by
the words quoted above from Article XI: "Something of
it [of a discussion concerning eternal election] has been
mooted also among our theologians." This controversy
took place from 1561 to 1563, at Strassburg, where
Lutheranism and Calvinism came into immediate contact.
In 1536 Strassburg had adopted the Wittenberg
Concord and with it the Augsburg Confession which
since took the place of the Tetrapolitana delivered to
Emperor Charles at the Diet of Augsburg, 1530. The
efficient and zealous leader in Lutheranizing the city
was John Marbach a graduate of Wittenberg and,
together with Mathesius, a former guest at Luther's
table. He was born in 1521 and labored in Strassburg
from 1545 to 1581, the year of his death.He had Bucer's
Catechism replaced by Luther's, and entered the public
controversy against the Calvinists with a publication
entitled, Concerning the Lord's Supper, against the
Sacramentarians, which defends the omnipresence of
Christ also according to His human nature.

In his efforts to Lutheranize the city, Marbach was
opposed by the Crypto-Calvinist Jerome Zanchi (born
1516, died 1590), a converted Italian and a pupil of Peter
Martyr [born September 8, 1500; won for
Protestantism by reading books of Bucer, Zwingli, and
others; professor, first in Strassburg, 1547 in Oxford;
compelled to return to the Continent (Strassburg and
Zurich) by Bloody Mary; died November 12, 1562,
when just about to write a book against Brenz]. From
1553 to 1563 Zanchi was professor of Old Testament
exegesis in Strassburg. Though he had signed the
Augsburg Confession, he was and remained a rigid
Calvinist, both with respect to the doctrine of predestination
and that of the Lord's Supper, but withheld his
public dissent until about 1561. It was the Calvinistic
doctrine of the perseverance of the saints, according to
which grace once received cannot be lost, upon which
Zanchi now laid especial emphasis. According to
Loescher (Historia Motuum 3, 30) he taught: "1. To the
elect in this world faith is given by God only once. 2.The
elect who have once been endowed with true faith ... can
never again lose faith altogether. 3. The elect never sin
with their whole mind or their entire will. 4.When Peter
denied Christ, he, indeed, lacked the confession of the
mouth, but not the faith of the heart. 1. Electis in hoc
saeculo semel tantum vera fides a Deo datur. 2. Electi
semel vera fide donati Christoque per Spiritum Sanctum
insiti fidem prorsus amittere ... non possunt. 3. In electis
regeneratis duo sunt homines, interior et exterior. Ii,quum
peccant, secundum tantum hominem exteriorem i.e., ea
tantum parte, qua non sunt regeniti, peccant; secundum
vero interiorem hominem nolunt peccatum et condelectantur
legi Dei; quare non toto animo aut plena voluntate
peccant. 4. Petrum, quum negavit Christum, defecit quidem
fidei confessio in ore sed non defecit fides in corde."
(Tschackert 560; Frank 4, 261.) This tenet, that believers
can neither lose their faith nor be eternally lost, had
been plainly rejected by Luther. In the Smalcald Articles
we read: "On the other hand, if certain sectarists would
arise, some of whom are perhaps already extant, and in
the time of the insurrection [of the peasants, {{< hiddenanchor 1525 >}}1525{{< /hiddenanchor >}}
came to my own view, holding that all those who had
once received the Spirit or the forgiveness of sins, or had
become believers, even though they should afterwards
sin, would still remain in the faith, and such sin would
not harm them, and hence crying thus: 'Do whatever
you please; if you believe, it all amounts to nothing: faith
blots out all sins,' etc.-they say, besides, that if any one
sins after he has received faith and the Spirit, he never
truly had the Spirit and faith: I have had before me
many such insane men, and I fear that in some such a
devil is still remaining [hiding and dwelling]. It is,
accordingly, necessary to know and to teach that when
holy men, still having and feeling original sin, also daily
repenting of and striving with it, happen to fall into
manifest sins, as David into adultery,murder, and blasphemy,
that then faith and the Holy Ghost has departed
from them. For the Holy Ghost does not permit sin
to have dominion, to gain the upper hand, so as to be
accomplished, but represses and restrains it so that it
must not do what it wishes. But if it does what it wishes,
the Holy Ghost and faith are not present.For St. John
says, 1 Ep. 3, 9: 'Whosoever is born of God doth not
commit sin, ... and he cannot sin.' And yet it is also the
truth when the same St. John says, 1 Ep. 1, 8: 'If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth
is not in us.'" (491, 42f.)

In an opinion of March 9, 1559, Melanchthon
remarks that about 1529 some Antinomians maintained
and argued "that, since in this life sin remains in
saints, they remain holy and retain the Holy Spirit and
salvation even when they commit adultery and other
sins against their conscience ... There are many at many
places who are imbued with this error [that righteousness,
Holy Spirit, and sins against the conscience can
remain in a man at the same time], regard themselves
holy although they live and persevere in sins against
their consciences." (C. R. 9, 764. 405. 473; 8, 411.)

The perseverance of saints as taught by Zanchi was
the point to which Marbach immediately took exception.
A long discussion followed, which was finally settled
by the Strassburg Formula of Concord of 1563, outside
theologians participating and acting as arbiters.
This Formula, which was probably prepared by Jacob
Andreae, treated in its first article the Lord's Supper; in
its second, predestination. It rejected the doctrine that,
once received, faith cannot be lost, and prescribed the
Wittenberg Concord of 1536 as the doctrinal rule regarding
the Holy Supper.The document was signed by both
parties, Zanchi stating over his signature: "Hanc doctrinae
formam ut piam agnosco, ita eam recipio." Evidently
his mental reservation was that he be permitted to withdraw
from it in as far as he did not regard it as pious.
Later Zanchi declared openly that he had subscribed the
Formula only conditionally. Soon after his subscription
he left Strassburg, serving till 1568 as preacher of a
Reformed Italian congregation in Chiavenna, till 1576
as professor in the Reformed University of Heidelberg,
and till 1582 as professor in Neustadt. He died at
Heidelberg as professor emeritus November 19, 1590.
Marbach continued his work at Strassburg, and was
active also in promoting the cause of the Formula of
Concord.His controversy with Zanchi, though of a local
character, may be regarded as the immediate cause for
adding Article XI. The thorough Lutheranizing of the
city was completed by Pappus, a pupil of Marbach. In
1597 Strassburg adopted the Formula of Concord.

#### 228. The Strassburg Formula.

The Strassburg Formula of Concord sets forth the
Scriptural and peculiarly Lutheran point of view in the
doctrine of election, according to which a Christian, in
order to attain to a truly divine assurance of his election
and final salvation, is to consider predestination not a
priori, but a posteriori. That is to say, he is not to speculate
on the act of eternal election as such, but to consider
it as manifested to him in Christ and the Gospel of
Christ. Judging from his own false conception of predestination,
Calvin remarked that the Strassburg
Formula did not deny but rather veiled, the doctrine of
election,-a stricture frequently made also on Article XI
of the Formula of Concord, whose truly Scriptural and
evangelical view of election the Reformed have never
fully grasped and realized.

The Strassburg Formula taught that, in accordance
with Rom. 15, 4, the doctrine of predestination must be
presented so as not to bring it into conflict with the doctrines
of repentance and justification nor to deprive
alarmed consciences of the consolation of the Gospel,
nor in any way to violate the truth that the only cause of
our salvation is the grace of God alone; that the consolation
afforded by election, especially in tribulations
(that no one shall pluck us out of the hands of Christ),
remains firm and solid only as long as the universality
of God's promises is kept inviolate, that Christ died and
earned salvation for all, and earnestly invites all to partake
of it by faith, which is the gift of grace, and which
alone receives the salvation proffered to all; that the reason
why the gift of faith is not bestowed upon all men,
though Christ seriously invites all to come to Him, is a
mystery known to God alone, which human reason
cannot fathom; that the will of God proposed in Christ
and revealed in the Bible, to which all men are directed,
and in which it is most safe to acquiesce, is not contradictory
of the hidden will of God. (Loescher, Hist Mot.
2, 229; Frank 4, 126. 262; Tschackert, 560.)

Particularly with respect to the "mystery," the
Strassburg Formula says: "The fact that this grace or this
gift of faith is not given by God to all when He calls all
to Himself, and, according to His infinite goodness, certainly
calls earnestly: 'Come unto the marriage, for all
things are now ready,' is a sealed mystery known to God
alone, past finding out for human reason; a secret that
must be contemplated with fear and be adored, as it is
written: 'O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His
judgments, and His ways past finding out!'Rom. 11, 33.
And Christ gives thanks to the Father because He has
hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed
them unto babes. Matt. 11, 25. Troubled consciences,
however,must not take offense at this hidden way of the
divine will but look upon the will of God revealed in
Christ, who calls all sinners to Himself." This was also
the teaching of the contemporary theologians.Moerlin
wrote: "God has revealed to us that He will save only
those who believe in Christ, and that unbelief is chargeable
to us. Hidden, however, are God's judgments-
why He converts Paul but does not convert Caiaphas;
why He receives fallen Peter again and abandons Judas
to despair." Chemnitz: "Why, then, is it that God does
not put such faith into the heart of Judas so that he, too,
might have believed and been saved through Christ?
Here we must leave off questioning and say,Rom.11:'O
the depth!' ...We cannot and must not search this nor
meditate too deeply upon such questions." Kirchner:
"Since, therefore, faith in Christ is a special gift of God,
why does He not bestow it upon all? Answer:We must
defer the discussion of this question unto eternal life,
and in the mean time be content to know that God does
not want us to search His secret judgments,Rom. 11: 'O
the depth,' etc." In a similar way Chemnitz, Selneccer,
and Kirchner expressed themselves in their Apology of
the Book of Concord, of 1582, declaring that, "when
asked why God does not convert all men, we must
answer with the apostle: 'How unsearchable are His
judgments and His ways past finding out!' but not
ascribe to God the Lord the willing and real cause of the
reprobation or damnation of the impenitent." (Pieper,
Dogm. 2, 585f.)

#### 229. Predestination according to Article XI of Formula of Concord.

In keeping with her fundamental teaching of sola
gratia and gratia universalis, according to which God's
grace is the only cause of man's salvation, and man's evil
will the sole cause of his damnation, the Lutheran
Church holds that eternal election is an election of
grace, i.e., a predestination to salvation only.God's eternal
election, says the Formula of Concord. "does not
extend at once over the godly and the wicked, but only
over the children of God, who were elected and
ordained to eternal life before the foundation of the
world was laid, as Paul says, Eph. 1, 4. 5: 'He hath chosen
us in Him, having predestinated us unto the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ.' " (1065, 5.) This election,
the Formula continues, "not only foresees and
foreknows the salvation of the elect, but is also, from the
gracious will and pleasure of God in Christ Jesus, a
cause which procures, works, helps, and promotes our
salvation, and what pertains thereto; and upon this
[divine predestination] our salvation is so founded that
the gates of hell cannot prevail against it,Matt. 16, 18, as
is written John 10, 28: 'Neither shall any man pluck My
sheep out of My hand,' And again, Acts 13, 48: 'And as
many as were ordained to eternal life believed.' " (1065,
8.) While thus election is a cause of faith and salvation,
there is no cause of election in man. The teaching "that
not only the mercy of God and the most holy merit of
Christ but also in us there is a cause of God's election on
account of which God has elected us to everlasting life,"
is rejected by the Formula of Concord as one of the "blasphemous
and dreadful erroneous doctrines whereby all
the comfort which they have in the holy Gospel and the
use of the holy Sacraments is taken from Christians."
(837, 20f.)

Concerning the way of considering eternal election,
the Formula writes: "If we wish to think or speak correctly
and profitably concerning eternal election, or the
predestination and ordination of the children of God to
eternal life,we should accustom ourselves not to speculate
concerning the bare, secret, concealed, inscrutable
foreknowledge of God, but how the counsel, purpose,
and ordination of God in Christ Jesus, who is the true
Book of Life, is revealed to us through the Word, namely,
that the entire doctrine concerning the purpose,
counsel, will, and ordination of God pertaining to our
redemption, call, justification, and salvation should be
taken together; as Paul treats and has explained this article
Rom. 8, 29f.; Eph. 1, 4f., as also Christ in the parable,
Matt. 22, 1ff." (1067, 13.)

While according to the Lutheran Church election is
the cause of faith and salvation, there is no such a thing
as an election of wrath or a predestination to sin and
damnation, of both of which God is not the cause and
author. According to the Formula the vessels of mercy
are prepared by God alone, but the vessels of dishonor
are prepared for damnation, not by God, but by themselves.
Moreover,God earnestly desires that all men turn
from their wicked ways and live.We read:"For all preparation
for condemnation is by the devil and man,
through sin, and in no respect by God, who does not
wish that any man be damned; how, then, should He
Himself prepare any man for condemnation? For as
God is not a cause of sins, so, too,He is no cause of punishment,
of damnation; but the only cause of damnation
is sin; for the wages of sin is death.Rom. 6, 23.And
as God does not will sin, and has no pleasure in sin, so
He does not wish the death of the sinner either,Ezek. 33,
11, nor has He pleasure in his condemnation. For He is
not willing that any one should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3, 9. So, too, it is written
in Ezek. 18, 23; 33, 11: 'As I live, saith the Lord God,
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked but that
the wicked turn from his way and live,'And St. Paul testifies
in clear words that from vessels of dishonor vessels
of honor may be made by God's power and working,
when he writes 2 Tim. 2, 21: 'If a man, therefore, purge
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared
unto every good work,' For he who is to purge himself
must first have been unclean, and hence a vessel of dishonor.
But concerning the vessels of mercy he says
clearly that the Lord Himself has prepared them for
glory, which he does not say concerning the damned,
who themselves, and not God, have prepared themselves
as vessels of damnation." (1089, 81f.) "Hence the
apostle distinguishes with special care the work of God,
who alone makes vessels of honor, and the work of the
devil and of man, who by the instigation of the devil,
and not of God, has made himself a vessel of dishonor.
For thus it is written, Rom. 9, 22f.: 'God endured with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction, that He might make known the riches of
His glory on the vessels of mercy, which He had afore
prepared unto glory.'Here, then, the apostle clearly says
that God endured with much longsuffering the vessels
of wrath, but does not say that He made them vessels of
wrath; for if this had been His will, He would not have
required any great long-suffering for it. The fault, however,
that they are fitted for destruction belongs to the
devil and to men themselves, and not to God." (1089,
79f.)

It is man's own fault when he is not converted by
the Word or afterwards falls away again.We read: "But
the reason why not all who hear it [the Word of God]
believe and are therefore condemned the more deeply,
is not because God had begrudged them their salvation;
but it is their own fault, as they have heard the Word in
such a manner as not to learn, but only to despise, blaspheme,
and disgrace it, and have resisted the Holy
Ghost, who through the Word wished to work in them,
as was the case at the time of Christ with the Pharisees
and their adherents." (1089, 78.) "For few receive the
Word and follow it; the greatest number despise the
Word, and will not come to the wedding,Matt. 22, 3ff.
The cause of this contempt for the Word is not God's
foreknowledge [or predestination], but the perverse will
of man, which rejects or perverts the means and instrument
of the Holy Ghost, which God offers him through
the call, and resists the Holy Ghost, who wishes to be
efficacious, and works through the Word, as Christ says:
'How often would I have gathered you together, and ye
would not!'Matt. 23, 37. Thus many receive the Word
with joy, but afterwards fall away again, Luke 8, 13. But
the cause is not as though God were unwilling to grant
grace for perseverance to those in whom He has begun
the good work, for that is contrary to St. Paul, Phil. 1, 6;
but the cause is that they wilfully turn away again from
the holy commandment, grieve and embitter the Holy
Ghost, implicate themselves again in the filth of the
world, and garnish again the habitation of the heart for
the devil.With them the last state is worse than the first."
(1077 41f.; 835, 12.)

It is not because of any deficiency in God that men
are lost; for His grace is universal as well as serious and
efficacious. The Formula of Concord declares:"However,
that many are called and few chosen is not owing to the
fact that the call of God, which is made through the
Word,had the meaning as though God said: Outwardly,
through the Word, I indeed call to My kingdom all of
you to whom I give My Word; however, in My heart I do
not mean this with respect to all, but only with respect
to a few; for it is My will that the greatest part of those
whom I call through the Word shall not be enlightened
nor converted, but be and remain damned, although
through the Word, in the call, I declare Myself to them
otherwise.Hoc enim esset Deo contradictorias voluntates
affingere. For this would be to assign contradictory wills
to God. That is, in this way it would be taught that God,
who surely is Eternal Truth, would be contrary to
Himself [or say one thing, but revolve another in His
heart], while, on the contrary, God [rebukes and] punishes
also in men this wickedness, when a person
declares himself to one purpose, and thinks and means
another in the heart, Ps. 5, 9; 12, 2f." (1075, 36.)

It is a punishment of their previous sins and not a
result of God's predestination when sinners are hardened;
nor does such hardening signify that it never was
God's good pleasure to save them."Moreover," says the
formula,"it is to be diligently considered that when God
punishes sin with sins, that is when He afterwards punishes
with obduracy and blindness those who had been
converted because of their subsequent security, impenitence,
and wilful sins, this should not be interpreted to
mean that it never had been God's good pleasure that
such persons should come to the knowledge of the
truth and be saved. For both these facts are God's
revealed will: first, that God will receive into grace all
who repent and believe in Christ; secondly, that He also
will punish those who wilfully turn away from the holy
commandment, and again entangle themselves in the
filth of the world 2 Pet. 2, 20, and garnish their hearts for
Satan, Luke 11, 25f., and do despite unto the Spirit of
God,Heb. 10, 29, and that they shall be hardened, blinded,
and eternally condemned if they persist therein."
(1091, 83.)

"But that God ... hardened Pharaoh's heart, namely,
that Pharaoh always sinned again and again and
became the more obdurate the more he was admonished,
that was a punishment of his antecedent sin and
horrible tyranny, which in many and manifold ways he
practised inhumanly and against the accusations of his
heart towards the children of Israel. And since God
caused His Word to be preached and His will to be proclaimed
to him, and Pharaoh nevertheless wilfully
reared up straightway against all admonitions and
warnings, God withdrew His hand from him and thus
his heart became hardened and obdurate, and God executed
His judgment upon him; for he was guilty of
nothing else than hell-fire.Accordingly, the holy apostle
also introduces the example of Pharaoh for no other
reason than to prove by it the justice of God which He
exercises towards the impenitent and despisers of His
Word; by no means,however, has he intended or understood
it to mean that God begrudged salvation to him
or any person, but had so ordained him to eternal
damnation in His secret counsel that he should not be
able, or that it should not be possible for him, to be
saved." (1091, 85f.)

#### 230.Agreement of Articles XI and II.

In the Formula ofConcord,Article XI is closely related
to most of the other articles particularly to Article I,
Of Original Sin, and Article II, Of Free Will and
Conversion. Election is to conversion what the concave
side of a lens is to the convex. Both correspond to each
other in every particular. What God does for and in
man when He converts, justifies, sanctifies, preserves,
and finally glorifies him, He has in eternity resolved to
do,-that is one way in which eternal election may be
defined. Synergists and Calvinists, however have always
maintained that the Second Article is in a hopeless conflict
with the Eleventh. But the truth is, the Second fully
confirms and corroborates the Eleventh, and vice versa;
for both maintain the sola gratia as well as the universalis
gratia.

Both articles teach that in every respect grace alone
is the cause of our conversion and salvation, and that
this grace is not confined to some men only, but is a
grace for all. Both teach that man, though contributing
absolutely nothing to his conversion and salvation, is
nevertheless the sole cause of his own damnation. Both
disavow Calvinism which denies the universality of
grace. Both reject synergism, which corrupts grace by
teaching a cooperation of man towards his own conversion
and salvation. Teaching therefore, as they do, the
same truths, both articles will and must ever stand and
fall together. It was, no doubt, chiefly due to this complete
harmony between the Second and the Eleventh
Article that after the former (which received its present
shape only after repeated changes and additions) had
been decided upon the revision of the latter (the
Eleventh) caused but little delay. (Frank 4,V. 133.)

Concerning the alleged conflict between Articles II
and XI, we read in Schaff's Creeds of Christendom:
"There is an obvious and irreconcilable antagonism
between Article II and Article XI. They contain not simply
opposite truths to be reconciled by theological science,
but contradictory assertions,which ought never to
be put into a creed. The Formula adopts one part of
Luther's book De Servo Arbitrio, 1525, and rejects the
other, which follows with logical necessity. It is
Augustinian, yea, hyper-Augustinian and hyper-
Calvinistic in the doctrine of human depravity, and
anti-Augustinian in the doctrine of divine predestination.
It endorses the anthropological premise, and
denies the theological conclusion. If man is by nature
like a stone and block, and unable even to accept the
grace of God, as Article II teaches, he can only be converted
by an act of almighty power and irresistible
grace, which Article XI denies. If some men are saved
without any cooperation on their part, while others,
with the same inability and the same opportunities, are
lost, the difference points to a particular predestination
and the inscrutable decree of God. On the other hand if
God sincerely wills the salvation of all men, as Article XI
teaches, and yet only a part are actually saved, there
must be some difference in the attitude of the saved and
the lost towards converting grace, which is denied in
Article II. The Lutheran system, then, to be consistent,
must rectify itself, and develop either from Article II in
the direction of Augustinianism and Calvinism, or from
Article XI in the direction of synergism and
Arminianism. The former would be simply returning to
Luther's original doctrine [?], which he never recalled,
though he may have modified it a little; the latter is the
path pointed out by Melanchthon, and adopted more
or less by some of the ablest modern Lutherans."(1, 314.
330.) Prior to Schaff, similar charges had been raised by
Planck, Schweizer, Heppe, and others, who maintained
that Article XI suffers from a "theological confusion
otherwise not found in the Formula."

Apart from other unwarranted assertions in the
passage quoted from Schaff, the chief charges there
raised against the Formula of Concord are: 1. that
Articles XI and II are contradictory to each other, 2. that
the Lutheran Church has failed to harmonize the doctrines
of sola gratia and gratia universalis. However, the
first of these strictures is based on gross ignorance of the
facts, resulting from a superficial investigation of the
articles involved, for the alleged disagreement is purely
imaginary. As a matter of fact, no one can read the two
articles attentively without being everywhere impressed
with their complete harmony. In every possible way
Article XI excludes synergism, and corroborates the sola
gratia doctrine of Article II. And Article II, in turn,
nowhere denies, rather everywhere, directly or indirectly,
confirms, the universal grace particularly emphasized
in Article XI.

The framers of the Formula were well aware of the
fact that the least error in the doctrine of free will and
conversion was bound to manifest itself also in the doctrine
of election, and that perhaps in a form much more
difficult to detect.Hence Article XI was not only intended
to be a bulwark against the assaults on the doctrine
of grace coming from Calvinistic quarters, but also an
additional reenforcement of the article of Free Will
against the Synergists, in order to prevent a future
recrudescence of their errors in the sphere of predestination.
Its object is clearly to maintain the doctrine of
the Bible, according to which it is grace alone that saves,
a grace which, at the same time, is a grace for all, and
thus to steer clear of synergism as well as of Calvinism,
and forever to close the doors of the Lutheran Church
to every form of these two errors.

According to the Second Article, Christians cannot
be assured of their election if the doctrine of conversion
[by grace alone] is not properly presented. (901, 47. 57.)
And Article XI most emphatically supports Article II in
its efforts to weed out every kind of synergistic or
Romanistic corruption. For here we read: "Thus far the
mystery of predestination is revealed to us in God's
Word; and if we abide thereby and cleave thereto, it is a
very useful salutary, consolatory doctrine; for it establishes
very effectually the article that we are justified and
saved without all works and merits of ours, purely out
of grace alone, for Christ's sake. For before the time of
the world, before we existed, yea, before the foundation
of the world was laid, when, of course, we could do
nothing good,we were according to God's purpose chosen
by grace in Christ to salvation,Rom. 9, 11; 2 Tim. 1,
9.Moreover, all opinions and erroneous doctrines concerning
the powers of our natural will are thereby overthrown,
because God in His counsel, before the time of
the world, decided and ordained that He Himself,by the
power of His Holy Ghost, would produce and work in
us, through the Word, everything that pertains to our
conversion." (1077, 43f.; 837, 20.)

Again: "By this doctrine and explanation of the
eternal and saving choice of the elect children of God,
His own glory is entirely and fully given to God, that in
Christ He saves us out of pure [and free] mercy, without
any merits or good works of ours, according to the
purpose of His will, as it is written Eph. 1, 5f.: 'Having
predestinated us,' ...Therefore it is false and wrong when
it is taught that not alone the mercy of God and the
most holy merit of Christ, but that also in us there is a
cause of God's predestination on account of which God
has chosen us to eternal life." Indeed, one of the most
exclusive formulations against every possible kind of
subtile synergism is found in Article XI when it teaches
that the reason why some are converted and saved while
others are lost, must not be sought in man, i.e., in any
minor guilt or less faulty conduct toward grace shown
by those who are saved, as compared with the guilt and
conduct of those who are lost. (1081, 57f.) If, therefore,
the argument of the Calvinists and Synergists that the
sola gratia doctrine involves a denial of universal grace
were correct, the charge of Calvinism would have to be
raised against Article XI as well as against Article II.

In a similar manner the Second Article confirms
the Eleventh by corroborating its anti-Calvinistic teaching
of universal grace and redemption; of man's responsibility
for his own damnation; of man's conversion, not
by compulsion or coercion, etc. The Second Article
most emphatically teaches the sola gratia,but without in
any way limiting, violating, or encroaching upon, universal
grace. It is not merely opposed to Pelagian, Semi-
Pelagian and synergistic errors, but to Stoic and
Calvinistic aberrations as well.While it is not the special
object of the Second Article to set forth the universality
of God's grace, its anti-Calvinistic attitude is nevertheless
everywhere apparent.

#### 231.Mystery in Doctrine of Grace.

The second charge raised by Calvinists and
Synergists against the Formula of Concord is its failure to
harmonize "logically" what they term "contradictory
doctrines": sola gratia and universalis gratia,-a stricture
which must be characterized as flowing from rationalistic
premises, mistaking a divine mystery for a real
contradiction, and in reality directed against the clear
Word of God itself. Says Schaff, who also in this point
voices the views of Calvinists as well as Synergists: "The
Formula of Concord sanctioned a compromise between
Augustinianism and universalism, or between the original
Luther and the later Melanchthon,by teaching both
the absolute inability of man and the universality of
divine grace, without an attempt to solve these contradictory
positions." (304.) "Thus the particularism of
election and the universalism of vocation, the absolute
inability of fallen man, and the guilt of the unbeliever
for rejecting what he cannot accept, are illogically combined."
(1, 330.) The real charge here raised against the
Formula of Concord is, that it fails to modify the doctrines
of sola gratia or universalis gratia in a manner satisfactory
to the demands of human reason; for
Synergists and Calvinists are agreed that, in the interest
of rational harmony, one or the other must be abandoned,
either universalis gratia seria et efficax, or sola
gratia. In judging of the charge in question, it should
not be overlooked that, according to the Formula of
Concord, all Christians, theologians included, are bound
to derive their entire doctrine from the Bible alone; that
matters of faith must be decided exclusively by clear
passages of Holy Scripture, that human reason ought
not in any point to criticize and lord it over the infallible
Word of God; that reason must be subjected to the
obedience of Christ, and dare not hinder faith in believing
the divine testimonies even when they seemingly
contradict each other.We are not commanded to harmonize,
says the Formula, but to believe, confess,
defend, and faithfully to adhere to the teachings of the
Bible. (1079, 52ff.) In the doctrine of conversion and
salvation, therefore,Lutherans confess both the sola gratia
and the universalis gratia,because they are convinced
that both are clearly taught in the Bible, and that to
reject or modify either of them would amount to a criticism
of the Word of God, and hence of God Himself.
Synergists differ from Lutherans, not in maintaining
universal grace (which in reality they deny as to intention
as well as extension, for they corrupt the Scriptural
content of grace by making it dependent on man's conduct,
and thereby limit its extension to such only as
comply with its conditions), but in denying the sola gratia,
and teaching that the will of man enters conversion
as a factor alongside of grace.And Calvinists differ from
Lutherans not in maintaining the sola gratia, but in
denying universal grace.

But while, in accordance with the clear Word of
God, faithfully adhering to both the sola gratia and universalis
gratia, and firmly maintaining that whoever is
saved is saved by grace alone, and whoever is lost is lost
through his own fault alone, the Formula of Concord at
the same time fully acknowledges the difficulty presenting
itself to human reason when we hold fast to this
teaching. In particular, it admits that the question, not
answered in the Bible, viz., why some are saved while
others are lost, embraces a mystery which we lack the
means and ability of solving, as well as the data.
Accordingly, the Formula also makes no efforts whatever
to harmonize them, but rather discountenances and
warns against all attempts to cater to human reason in
this respect, and insists that both doctrines be maintained
intact and taught conjointly. Lutherans are fully
satisfied that here every effort at rational harmonization
cannot but lead either to Calvinistic corruption of universal
grace or to synergistic modification of sola gratia.
Thus the Lutheran Church not only admits, but zealously
guards, the mystery contained in the doctrine of
grace and election. It distinguishes between God in as
far as He is known and not known; in as far as He has
revealed Himself, and in as far as He is still hidden to us,
but as we shall learn to know Him hereafter. The truths
which may be known concerning God are contained in
the Gospel, revealed in the Bible. The things still hidden
from us include the unsearchable judgments of God,
His wonderful ways with men, and, in particular, the
question why some are saved while others are lost. God
has not seen fit to reveal these mysteries.And since reason
cannot search or fathom God, man's quest for an
answer is both presumptuous and vain. That is to say,
we are utterly unable to uncover the divine counsels,
which would show that the mysterious judgments and
ways proceeding from them are in complete harmony
with the universal grace proclaimed by the Gospel.

Yet Lutherans believe that the hidden God is not in
real conflict with God as revealed in the Bible, and that
the secret will of God does not in the least invalidate the
gracious will of the Gospel.According to the Formula of
Concord there are no real contradictions in God; in Him
everything is yea and amen;His very being is pure reality
and truth. Hence, when relying on God as revealed
in Christ, that is to say, relying on grace which is pure
grace only and at the same time grace for all, Christians
may be assured that there is absolutely nothing in the
unknown God, i.e., in as far as He has not revealed
Himself to them, which might subvert their simple faith
in His gracious promises. The face of God depicted in
the Gospel is the true face of God. Whoever has seen
Christ has seen the Father as He is in reality.

Indeed, also the hidden God, together with His
secret counsels, unsearchable judgments, and ways past
finding out, even the majestic God,in whom we live and
move and have our being, the God who has all things
well in hand, and without whom nothing can be or
occur,must, in the light of the Scriptures, be viewed as
an additional guarantee that, in spite of all contingencies,
the merciful divine promises of the Gospel shall
stand firm and immovable. Upon eternal election, says
the Formula of Concord, "our salvation is so [firmly]
founded 'that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it.'
" (1065, 8.) As for us, therefore, it remains our joyous
privilege not to investigate what God has withheld from
us or to climb into the adyton of God's transcendent
majesty, but merely to rely on, and securely trust in, the
blessed Gospel,which proclaims grace for all and salvation
by grace alone, and teaches that whoever is saved
must praise God alone for it, while whoever is damned
must blame only himself.

Regarding the mystery involved in predestination,
the Formula of Concord explains: "A distinction must be
observed with especial care between that which is
expressly revealed concerning it [predestination] in
God's Word and what is not revealed. For in addition to
what has been revealed in Christ concerning this, of
which we have hitherto spoken,God has still kept secret
and concealed much concerning this mystery, and
reserved it for His wisdom and knowledge alone, which
we should not investigate, nor should we indulge our
thoughts in this matter, nor draw conclusions nor
inquire curiously, but should adhere to the revealed
Word. This admonition is most urgently needed. For
our curiosity has always much more pleasure in concerning
itself with these matters [investigating things
abstruse and hidden] than with what God has revealed
to us concerning this in His Word, because we cannot
harmonize it [cannot by the acumen of our natural
ability harmonize the intricate and involved things
occurring in this mystery], which, moreover, we have
not been commanded to do."

The Formula enumerates as such inscrutable mysteries:
Why God gives His Word at one place, but not at
another; why He removes it from one place, and allows
it to remain at another; why one is hardened, while
another, who is in the same guilt, is converted again.
Such and similar questions, says the Formula,we cannot
answer and must not endeavor to solve. On the contrary,
we are to adhere unflinchingly to both truths, viz.,
that those who are converted are saved, not because they
are better than others, but by pure grace alone; and that
those who are not converted and not saved cannot
accuse God of any neglect or injustice but are lost by
their own fault. The Formula concludes its paragraphs
on the mysteries in predestination by saying: "When we
proceed thus far in this article [maintaining that God
alone is the cause of man's salvation and man alone is
the cause of his damnation, and refusing to solve the
problems involved], we remain on the right [safe and
royal] way, as it is written Hos. 13, 9: 'O Israel, thou hast
destroyed thyself; but in Me is thy help.' However, as
regards these things in this disputation which would
soar too high and beyond these limits, we should, with
Paul, place the finger upon our lips, remember and say,
Rom. 9, 20: 'O man, who art thou that repliest against
God?'" (1078, 52ff.)

#### 232. Predestination a Comforting Article.

Christian doctrines, or doctrines of the Church, are
such only as are in exact harmony with the Scriptures.
They alone, too, are able to serve the purpose for which
the Scriptures are given, viz., to convert and save sinners,
and to comfort troubled Christians. Scriptural doctrines
are always profitable, and detrimental doctrines
are never Scriptural. This is true also of the article of
eternal election. It is a truly edifying doctrine as also the
Formula of Concord is solicitous to explain. (1092, 89ff.)
However, it is comforting only when taught in its purity,
i.e., when presented and preserved in strict adherence
to the Bible; that is to say, when both the sola gratia and
gratia universalis are kept inviolate.Whenever the doctrine
of predestination causes despair or carnal security,
it has been either misrepresented or misunderstood

In the introductory paragraphs of Article XI we
read: "For the doctrine concerning this article, if taught
from, and according to the pattern of the divine Word,
neither can nor should be regarded as useless or unnecessary,
much less as offensive or injurious, because the
Holy Scriptures not only in but one place and incidentally,
but in many places thoroughly treat and urge the
same. Moreover, we should not neglect or reject the
doctrine of the divine Word on account of abuse or
misunderstanding, but precisely on that account, in
order to avert all abuse and misunderstanding the true
meaning should and must be explained from the foundation
of the Scriptures." (1063, 2; 1067, 13.)

"If it is treated properly," says also the Epitome, the
doctrine of predestination "is a consolatory article"
(831, 1); that is to say, if predestination is viewed in the
light of the Gospel, and particularly, if sola gratia as well
as gratia universalis are kept inviolate. Outside of God's
revelation in the Gospel there is no true and wholesome
knowledge whatever concerning election, but mere
noxious human dreams. And when the universality of
grace is denied, it is impossible for any one to know
whether he is elected, and whether the grace spoken of
in the Gospel is intended for or belongs to him.
"Therefore," says the Formula of Concord, "if we wish to
consider our eternal election to salvation with profit,we
must in every way hold sturdily and firmly to this, that,
as the preaching of repentance, so also the promise of
the Gospel is universalis (universal), that is, it pertains to
all men, Luke 24, 47," etc. (1071, 28.) By denying that
universal grace is meant seriously and discounting the
universal promises of the Gospel,"the necessary consolatory
foundation is rendered altogether uncertain and
void, as we are daily reminded and admonished that
only from God's Word, through which He treats with us
and calls us, we are to learn and conclude what His will
toward us is, and that we should believe and not doubt
what it affirms to us and promises." (1075, 36.) If God
cannot be trusted in His universal promises, absolutely
nothing in the Bible can be relied upon. A doctrine of
election from which universal grace is eliminated, necessarily
leads to despair or to contumaciousness and
carnal security. Calvin was right when he designated his
predestination theory, which denies universal grace, a
"horrible decree." It left him without any objective
foundation whatever upon which to rest his faith and
hope.

In like manner, when the doctrine of election and
grace is modified synergistically, no one can know for
certain whether he has really been pardoned and will be
saved finally, because here salvation is not exclusively
based on the sure and immovable grace and promises of
God, but, at least in part, on man's own doubtful conduct-
a rotten plank which can serve neither foot for
safely crossing the great abyss of sin and death. Only
when presented and taught in strict adherence to the
Bible is the doctrine of election and grace fully qualified
to engender divine certainty of our present adoption
and final salvation as well, since it assures us that God
sincerely desires to save all men (us included), that He
alone does, and has promised to do, everything pertaining
thereto, and that nothing is able to thwart His promises,
since He who made them and confirmed them
with an oath is none other than the majestic God
Himself.

Accordingly, when Calvinists and Synergists criticize
the Formula of Concord for not harmonizing (modifying
in the interest of rational harmony) the clear doctrines
of the Bible, which they brand as contradictions,
they merely display their own conflicting, untenable
position. For while professing to follow the Scriptures,
they at the same time demand that its doctrines be corrected
according to the dictate of reason, thus plainly
revealing that their theology is not founded on the
Bible, but orientated in rationalism, the true ultimate
principle of Calvinism as well as synergism.

In the last analysis, therefore, the charge of inconsistency
against the Formula of Concord is tantamount
to an indirect admission that the Lutheran Church is
both a consistently Scriptural and a truly evangelical
Church. Consistently Scriptural, because it receives in
simple faith and with implicit obedience every clear
Word of God, all counter-arguments to the contrary
notwithstanding.Truly evangelical, because in adhering
with unswerving loyalty to the seemingly contradictory,
but truly Scriptural doctrine of grace, it serves the purpose
of the Scriptures, which-praise the Lord-is
none other than to save, edify, and comfort poor disconsolate
sinners.

#### 233. Statements of Article XI on Consolation Offered by Predestination.

The purpose of the entire Scripture, says the
Formula of Concord, is to comfort penitent sinners. If we
therefore abide by, and cleave to, predestination as it is
revealed to us in God's Word, "it is a very useful, salutary,
consolatory doctrine." Every presentation of eternal
election, however which produces carnal security or
despair, is false.We read: "If any one presents the doctrine
concerning the gracious election of God in such a
manner that troubled Christians cannot derive comfort
from it, but are thereby incited to despair, or that the
impenitent are confirmed in their wantonness, it is
undoubtedly sure and true that such a doctrine is
taught, not according to the Word and will of God, but
according to [the blind judgment of human] reason
and the instigation of the devil. For, as the apostle testifies,
Rom. 15, 4: 'Whatsoever things were written aforetime
were written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.' But when this consolation and hope are weakened
or entirely removed by Scripture, it is certain that
it is understood and explained contrary to the will and
meaning of the Holy Ghost." (1093, 91f., 837, 16; 1077,
43)

Predestination is comforting when Christians are
taught to seek their election in Christ. We read:
"Moreover, this doctrine gives no one a cause either for
despondency or for a shameless, dissolute life, namely,
when men are taught that they must seek eternal election
in Christ and His holy Gospel, as in the Book of
Life, which excludes no penitent sinner, but beckons
and calls all the poor, heavy-laden, and troubled sinners
who are disturbed by the sense of God's wrath, to
repentance and the knowledge of their sins and to faith
in Christ, and promises the Holy Ghost for purification
and renewal, and thus gives the most enduring consolation
to all troubled, afflicted men, that they know that
their salvation is not placed in their own hands (for otherwise
they would lose it much more easily than was the
case with Adam and Eve in Paradise, yea, every hour and
moment), but in the gracious election of God which He
has revealed to us in Christ, out of whose hand no man
shall pluck us, John 10, 28; 2 Tim. 2, 19." (1093, 89.)

In order to manifest its consolatory power predestination
must be presented in proper relation to the
revealed order of salvation.We read:"With this revealed
will of God [His universal, gracious promises in the
Gospel] we should concern ourselves, follow and be
diligently engaged upon it, because through the Word,
whereby He calls us, the Holy Ghost bestows grace,
power, and ability to this end [to begin and complete
our salvation], and should not [attempt to] sound the
abyss of God's hidden predestination, as it is written in
Luke 13, 24, where one asks: 'Lord, are there few that be
saved?'and Christ answers:'Strive to enter in at the strait
gate.' Accordingly, Luther says [in his Preface to the
Epistle to the Romans]: 'Follow the Epistle to the
Romans in its order, concern yourself first with Christ
and His Gospel, that you may recognize your sins and
His grace; next that you contend with sin. as Paul teaches
from the first to the eighth chapter; then, when in the
eighth chapter you will come into [will have been exercised
by] temptation under the cross and afflictions,-
this will teach you in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh
chapters how consolatory predestination is,' etc." (1073,
33.)

Predestination, properly taught, affords the glorious
comfort that no one shall pluck us out of the
almighty hands of Christ. The Formula says: "Thus this
doctrine affords also the excellent glorious consolation
that God was so greatly concerned about the conversion,
righteousness, and salvation of every Christian,
and so faithfully purposed it [provided therefor] that
before the foundation of the world was laid,He deliberated
concerning it, and in His [secret] purpose ordained
how He would bring me thereto [call and lead me to
salvation], and preserve me therein. Also, that He
wished to secure my salvation so well and certainly that,
since through the weakness and wickedness of our flesh
it could easily be lost from our hands, or through craft
and might of the devil and the world be snatched and
taken from us, He ordained it in His eternal purpose,
which cannot fail or be overthrown, and placed it for
preservation in the almighty hand of our Savior Jesus
Christ, from which no one can pluck us, John 10, 28.
Hence Paul also says, Rom. 8, 28. 39: 'Because we have
been called according to the purpose of God, who will
separate us from the love of God in Christ?' [Paul builds
the certainty of our blessedness upon the foundation of
the divine purpose,when,from our being called according
to the purpose of God,he infers that no one can separate
us, etc.]"(1079, 45.) "This article also affords a glorious
testimony that the Church of God will exist and
abide in opposition to all the gates of hell, and likewise
teaches which is the true Church of God, lest we be
offended by the great authority [and majestic appearance]
of the false Church, Rom. 9, 24. 25." (1079, 50.)

Especially in temptations and tribulations the doctrine
of eternal election reveals its comforting power.
We read: "Moreover, this doctrine affords glorious consolation
under the cross and amid temptations, namely,
that God in His counsel, before the time of the world
determined and decreed that He would assist us in all
distresses [anxieties and perplexities], grant patience,
give consolation, excite [nourish and encourage] hope,
and produce such an outcome as would contribute to
our salvation. Also, as Paul in a very consolatory way
treats this, Rom. 8, 28. 29. 35. 38. 39, that God in His
purpose has ordained before the time of the world by
what crosses and sufferings He would conform every
one of His elect to the image of His Son, and that to
every one his cross shall and must work together for
good, because they are called according to the purpose,
whence Paul has concluded that it is certain and indubitable
that neither tribulation nor distress, nor death,
nor life, etc., shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord." (1079, 48.)

