---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XXI.Luther and Article XI of the Formula of Concord.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 21
---

#### 234. Luther Falsely Charged with Calvinism.

Calvinists and Synergists have always contended
that Luther's original doctrine of predestination was
essentially identical with that of John Calvin.
Melanchthon was among the first who raised a charge
to this effect. In his Opinion to Elector August, dated
March 9 1559, we read: "During Luther's life and afterwards
I rejected these Stoic and Manichean deliria,
when Luther and others wrote: All works, good and
bad, in all men, good and bad, must occur as they do.
Now it is apparent that such speech contradicts the
Word of God, is detrimental to all discipline and blasphemes
God. Therefore I have sedulously made a distinction,
showing to what extent man has a free will to
observe outward discipline, also before regeneration"
etc. (C. R. 9, 766.) Instead of referring to his own early
statements, which were liable to misinterpretation more
than anything that Luther had written, Melanchthon
disingenuously mentions Luther, whose real meaning
he misrepresents and probably had never fully grasped.
The true reason why Melanchthon charged Luther and
his loyal adherents with Stoicism was his own synergistic
departure from the Lutheran doctrine of original sin
and of salvation by grace alone. Following
Melanchthon, rationalizing Synergists everywhere have
always held that without abandoning Luther's doctrine
of original sin and of the gratia sola there is no escape
from Calvinism. In this point Reformed theologians
agree with the Synergists, and have therefore always
claimed Luther as their ally. I. Mueller declared in
Lutheri de Praedestionatione et Libero Arbitrio Doctrina
of 1832:"As to the chief point (quod ad caput rei attinet)
Zwingli's view of predestination is in harmony with
Luther's De Servo Arbitrio." In his Zentraldogmen of
1854 Alexander Schweizer endeavored to prove that the
identical doctrine of predestination was originally the
central dogma of the Lutheran as well as of the
Zwinglian reformation. "It is not so much the dogma
[of predestination] itself," said he (1, 445), "as its position
which is in dispute" among Lutherans and
Calvinists. Schweizer (1, 483) based his assertion on the
false assumption "that the doctrines of the captive will
and of absolute predestination [denial of universal
grace] are two halves of the same ring." (Frank 1, 12.
118. 128; 4, 262.) Similar contentions were made in
America by Schaff,Hodge, Shedd, and other Reformed
theologians.

As a matter of fact, however, also in the doctrine of
predestination Zwingli and Calvin were just as far and
as fundamentally apart from Luther as their entire
rationalistic theology differed from the simple and
implicit Scripturalism of Luther. Frank truly says that
the agreement between Luther's doctrine and that of
Zwingli and Calvin is "only specious, nur scheinbar." (1,
118.) Tschackert remarks: "Whoever [among the theologians
before the Formula of Concord] was acquainted
with the facts could not but see that in this doctrine
[of predestination] there was a far-reaching difference
between the Lutheran and the Calvinistic theology."
(559.) F. Pieper declares that Luther and Calvin agree
only in certain expressions, but differ entirely as to substance.
(Dogm. 3, 554.)

The Visitation Articles, adopted 1592 as a norm of
doctrine for Electoral Saxony, enumerate the following
propositions on "Predestination and the Eternal
Providence of God"which must be upheld over against
the Calvinists as "the pure and true doctrine of our
[Lutheran] churches": "1. That Christ has died for all
men, and as the Lamb of God has borne the sins of the
whole world. 2. That God created no one for condemnation,
but will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth. He commands all to hear
His Son Christ in the Gospel, and promises by it the
power and working of the Holy Ghost for conversion
and salvation. 3. That many men are condemned by
their own guilt who are either unwilling to hear the
Gospel of Christ, or again fall from grace, by error
against the foundation or by sins against conscience. 4.
That all sinners who repent are received into grace and
no one is excluded, even though his sins were as scarlet,
since God's mercy is much greater than the sins of all
the world, and God has compassion on all His works."
(CONC. TRIGL. 1153.) Not one of these propositions,
which have always been regarded as a summary of the
Lutheran teaching in contradistinction from Calvinism,
was ever denied by Luther.

#### 235. Summary of Luther's Views.

Luther distinguished between the hidden and the
revealed or "proclaimed" God, the secret and revealed
will of God; the majestic God in whom we live and
move and have our being, and God manifest in Christ;
God's unsearchable judgments and ways past finding
out, and His merciful promises in the Gospel. Being
truly God and not an idol, God, according to Luther, is
both actually omnipotent and omniscient.Nothing can
exist or occur without His power, and everything surely
will occur as He has foreseen it. This is true of the
thoughts, volitions, and acts of all His creatures. He
would not be God if there were any power not derived
from, or supplied by Him, or if the actual course of
events could annul His decrees and stultify His knowledge.
Also the devils and the wicked are not beyond His
control.

As for evil, though God does not will or cause it,-
for, on the contrary,He prohibits sin and truly deplores
the death of a sinner-yet sin and death could never
have entered the world without His permission. Also
the will of fallen man receives its power to will from
God, and its every resolve and consequent act proceeds
just as God has foreseen, ordained, or permitted it. The
evil quality of all such acts, however, does not emanate
from God, but from the corrupt will of man.Hence free
will, when defined as the power of man to nullify and
subvert what God's majesty has foreseen and decreed, is
a nonent, a mere empty title. This, however, does not
involve that the human will is coerced or compelled to
do evil, nor does it exclude in fallen man the ability to
choose in matters temporal and subject to reason.

But while holding that we must not deny the
majesty and the mysteries of God,Luther did not regard
these, but Christ crucified and justification by faith in
the promises of the Gospel, as the true objects of our
concern.Nor does he, as did Calvin, employ predestination
as a corrective and regulative norm for interpreting,
limiting, invalidating, annulling, or casting doubt
upon, any of the blessed truths of the Gospel. Luther
does not modify the revealed will of God in order to
harmonize it with God's sovereignty.He does not place
the hidden God in opposition to the revealed God, nor
does he reject the one in order to maintain the other.He
denies neither the revealed universality of God's grace,
of Christ's redemption, and of the efficaciousness of the
Holy Spirit in the means of grace, nor the unsearchable
judgments and ways of God's majesty. Even the
Reformed theologian A. Schweizer admits as much
when he says in his Zentraldogmen (1, 445): "In the
Zwinglio-Calvinian type of doctrine, predestination is a
dogma important as such and regulating the other doctrines,
yea, as Martyr,Beza, and others say, the chief part
of Christian doctrine; while in the Lutheran type of
doctrine it is merely a dogma supporting other, more
important central doctrines." (Frank 4, 264.)

Moreover, Luther most earnestly warns against all
speculations concerning the hidden God as futile, foolish,
presumptuous, and wicked. The secret counsels,
judgments, and ways of God cannot and must not be
investigated. God's majesty is unfathomable, His judgments
are unsearchable, His ways past finding out.
Hence, there is not, and there cannot be, any human
knowledge, understanding, or faith whatever concerning
God in so far as He has not revealed Himself. For
while the fact that there are indeed such things as mysteries,
unsearchable judgments, and incomprehensible
ways in God is plainly taught in the Bible, their nature,
their how, why, and wherefore, has not been revealed to
us and no amount of human ingenuity is able to supply
the deficiency.Hence, in as far as God is still hidden and
veiled,He cannot serve as a norm by which we are able
to regulate our faith and life. Particularly when considering
the question how God is disposed toward us individually,
we must not take refuge in the secret counsels
of God, which reason cannot spy and pry into.
According to Luther, all human speculations concerning
the hidden God are mere diabolical inspirations,
bound to lead away from the saving truth of the Gospel
into despair and destruction.

What God, therefore, would have men believe
about His attitude toward them, must according to
Luther, be learned from the Gospel alone. The Bible tells
us how God is disposed toward poor sinners, and how
He wants to deal with them. Not His hidden majesty,
but His only-begotten Son, born in Bethlehem, is the
divinely appointed object of human investigation.
Christ crucified is God manifest and visible to men.
Whoever has seen Christ has seen God. The Gospel is
God's only revelation to sinful human beings. The Bible
the ministry of the Word, Baptism, the Lord's Supper,
and absolution are the only means of knowing how
God is disposed toward us. To these alone God has
directed us.With these alone men should occupy and
concern themselves.

And the Gospel being the Word of God, the knowledge
furnished therein is most reliable. Alarmed sinners
may trust in its comforting promises with firm assurance
and unwavering confidence. In De Servo Arbitrio
Luther earnestly warns men not to investigate the hidden
God, but to look to revelation for an answer to the
question how God is minded toward them, and how He
intends to deal with them. In his Commentary on
Genesis he refers to this admonition and repeats it,
protesting that he is innocent if any one is misled to take
a different course. "I have added" [to the statements in
De Servo Arbitrio concerning necessity and the hidden
God] Luther here declares,"that we must look upon the
revealed God. Addidi, quod aspiciendus sit Deus revelatus."
(CONC. TRIGL. 898.)

This Bible-revelation, however, by which alone
Luther would have men guided in judging God, plainly
teaches both, that grace is universal, and that salvation is
by grace alone. Luther always taught the universality of
God's love and mercy, as well as of Christ's redemption,
and the operation of the Holy Spirit in the means of
grace. Also according to De Servo Arbitrio,God wants all
men to be saved, and does not wish the death of sinners,
but deplores and endeavors to remove it. Luther fairly
revels in such texts as Ezek. 18, 23 and 31, 11: "As I live,
saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live. Turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die,O
house of Israel?"He calls the above a "glorious passage"
and "that sweetest Gospel voice-illam vocem dulcissimi
Evangelii." (E. v. a. 7, 218.)

Thus Luther rejoiced in universal grace, because it
alone was able to convince him that the Gospel promises
embraced and included also him. In like manner he
considered the doctrine that salvation is by grace alone
to be most necessary and most comforting. Without
this truth divine assurance of salvation is impossible,
with it, all doubts about the final victory of faith are
removed.Luther was convinced that, if he were required
to contribute anything to his own conversion, preservation,
and salvation, he could never attain
these blessings. Nothing can save but the grace
which is grace alone. In De Servo Arbitrio everything is
pressed into service to disprove and explode the assertion
of Erasmus that the human will is able to and does
"work something in matters pertaining to salvation,"
and to establish the monergism or sole activity of grace
in man's conversion. (St. L. 18, 1686, 1688.)

At the same time Luther maintained that man
alone is at fault when he is lost. In De Servo Arbitrio he
argues: Since it is God's will that all men should be
saved, it must be attributed to man's will if any one perishes.
The cause of damnation is unbelief, which
thwarts the gracious will of God so clearly revealed in
the Gospel. The question, however, why some are lost
while others are saved, though their guilt is equal, or
why God does not save all men, since it is grace alone
that saves, and since grace is universal, Luther declines
to answer. Moreover, he demands that we both
acknowledge and adore the unsearchable judgments of
God, and at the same time firmly adhere to the Gospel
as revealed in the Bible. All efforts to solve this mystery
or to harmonize the hidden and the revealed God,
Luther denounces as folly and presumption.

Yet Luther maintains that the conflict is seeming
rather than real.Whatever may be true of the majestic
God, it certainly cannot annul or invalidate what He has
made known of Himself in the Gospel. There are and
can be no contradictory wills in God. Despite appearances
to the contrary, therefore, Christians are firmly to
believe that, in His dealings with men, God, who saves
so few and damns so many, is nevertheless both truly
merciful and just.And what we now believe we shall see
hereafter. When the veil will have been lifted and we
shall know God even as we are known by Him, then we
shall see with our eyes no other face of God than the
most lovable one which our faith beheld in Jesus. The
light of glory will not correct but confirm, the truths of
the Bible, and reveal the fact that in all His ways God
was always in perfect harmony with Himself.

Indeed, according to Luther, the truth concerning
the majestic God, in whom we live and move and have
our being, and without whom nothing can be or occur,
in a way serves both repentance and faith. It serves
repentance and the Law inasmuch as it humbles man,
causing him to despair of himself and of the powers of
his own unregenerate will. It serves faith inasmuch as it
guarantees God's merciful promises in the Gospel. For
if God is supreme, as He truly is, then there can be nothing
more reliable than the covenant of grace to which
He has pledged Himself by an oath. And if God, as He
truly does, controls all contingencies, then there
remains no room for any fear whether He will be able to
fulfil His glorious promises, also the promise that nothing
shall pluck us out of the hands of Christ.-Such,
essentially was the teaching set forth by Luther in De
Servo Arbitrio and in his other publications.

#### 236.Object of Luther's "De Servo Arbitrio."

The true scope of De Servo Arbitrio is to prove that
man is saved, not by any ability or efforts of his own, but
solely by grace. Luther says: "We are not arguing the
question what we can do when God works [moves us],
but what we can do ourselves, viz., whether, after being
created out of nothing, we can do or endeavor [to do]
anything through that general movement of omnipotence
toward preparing ourselves for being a new creation
of His Spirit. This question should have been
answered, instead of turning aside to another." Luther
continues: "We go on to say:Man, before he is renewed
to become a new creature of the kingdom of the Spirit,
does nothing, endeavors nothing, toward preparing
himself for renewal and the kingdom; and afterwards,
when he has been created anew, he does nothing,
endeavors nothing, toward preserving himself in that
kingdom; but the Spirit alone does each of these things
in us, both creating us anew without our cooperation
and preserving us when recreated,-even as Jas. 1, 18
says: 'Of His own will begat He us by the Word of Truth
that we should be a kind of firstfruits of His creatures,'
He is speaking here of the renewed creature." (E. v. a. 7,
317; St. L. 18, 1909; compare here and in the following
quotations Vaughan's Martin Luther on the Bondage of
the Will, London, 1823.)

Man lacks also the ability to do what is good before
God. Luther: "I reply: The words of the Prophet [Ps. 14,
2: "The Lord looketh down from heaven upon the children
of men to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God. They are all gone aside," etc.] include
both act and power; and it is the same thing to say,'Man
does not seek after God,' as it would be to say,'Man cannot
seek after God.'" (E. 330; St. L. 1923.) Again: "Since,
therefore, men are flesh, as God Himself testifies, they
cannot but be carnally minded (nihil sapere possunt nisi
carnem); hence free will has power only to sin.And since
they grow worse even when the Spirit of God calls and
teaches them, what would they do if left to themselves,
without the Spirit of God?" (E. 290; St. L. 1876.) "In
brief, you will observe in Scripture that wherever flesh is
treated in opposition to the Spirit, you may understand
by flesh about everything that is contrary to the Spirit,
as in the passage John 6, {{< hiddenanchor 63 >}}63{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'The flesh profiteth nothing.'"
(E. 29i; St. L. 1877.) "Thus also Holy Scripture, by
way of emphasis (per epitasin), calls man 'flesh,' as
though he were carnality itself, because his mind is
occupied with nothing but carnal things. Quod nimio ac
nihil aliud sapit quam ea, quae carnis sunt."(E. 302; St. L.
1890.)

According to Luther there is no such thing as a neutral
willing in man. He says: "It is a mere logical fiction
to say that there is in man a neutral and pure volition
(medium et purum velle); nor can those prove it who
assert it. It was born of ignorance of things and servile
regard to words, as if something must straightway be
such in substance as we state it to be in words, which
sort of figments are numberless among the Sophists
[Scholastic theologians]. The truth of the matter is stated
by Christ when He says [Luke 11, {{< hiddenanchor 23 >}}23{{< /hiddenanchor >}}:'He that is not
with Me is against Me,'He does not say,'He that is neither
with Me nor against Me, but in the middle,' For if
God be in us, Satan is absent, and only the will for good
is present with us. If God be absent, Satan is present,and
there is no will in us but towards evil. Neither God nor
Satan allows a mere and pure volition in us; but, as you
have rightly said, having lost our liberty, we are compelled
to serve sin; that is sin and wickedness we will, sin
and wickedness we speak, sin and wickedness we act."
(E. 199; St. L. 1768.)

In support of his denial of man's ability in spiritual
matters Luther quotes numerous Bible-passages, and
thoroughly refutes as fallacies a debito ad posse, etc., the
arguments drawn by Erasmus from mandatory and
conditional passages of Scripture. His own arguments
he summarizes as follows:"For if we believe it to be true
that God foreknows and preordains everything, also,
that He can neither be deceived nor hindered in His
foreknowledge and predestination furthermore that
nothing occurs without His will (a truth which reason
itself is compelled to concede), then, according to the
testimony of the selfsame reason, there can be no free
will in man or angel or any creature. Likewise, if we
believe Satan to be the prince of the world, who is perpetually
plotting and fighting against the kingdom of
Christ with all his might, so that he does not release captive
men unless he be driven out by the divine power of
the Spirit, it is again manifest that there can be no such
thing as free will.Again, if we believe original sin to have
so ruined us that, by striving against what is good, it
makes most troublesome work even for those who are
led by the Spirit, then it is clear that in man devoid of the
Spirit nothing is left which can turn itself to good, but
only [what turns itself] to evil. Again, if the Jews, following
after righteousness with all their might rushed
forth into unrighteousness, and the Gentiles, who were
following after unrighteousness, have freely and unexpectingly
attained to righteousness, it is likewise manifest,
even by very deed and experience, that man without
grace can will nothing but evil. In brief, if we believe
Christ to have redeemed man by His blood, then we are
compelled to confess that the whole man was lost; else
we shall make Christ either superfluous, or the
Redeemer only of the vilest part [of man] which is blasphemous
and sacrilegious." (E. 366; St. L. 1969.)

#### 237. Relation of Man's Will toward God's Majesty.

According to Luther man has power over things
beneath himself, but not over God in His majesty.We
read; "We know that man is constituted lord of the
things beneath him, over which he has power and free
will, that they may obey him and do what he wills and
thinks. But the point of our inquiry is whether he has a
free will toward God, so that God obeys and does what
man wills; or, whether it is not rather God who has a
free will over man, so that the latter wills and does what
God wills, and can do nothing but what God has willed
and does. Here the Baptist says that man can receive
nothing except it be given him from heaven: wherefore
free will is nothing." (E. 359, St. L. 1957.)

God as revealed in the Word may, according to
Luther, be opposed and resisted by man, but not God in
His majesty.We read:"Lest any one should suppose this
to be my own distinction, [let him know that] I follow
Paul, who writes to the Thessalonians concerning
Antichrist (2 Thess. 2, 4) that he will exalt himself above
every God that is proclaimed and worshiped, plainly
indicating that one may be exalted above God, so far as
He is proclaimed and worshiped, that is, above the
Word and worship by which God is known to us, and
maintains intercourse with us. Nothing, however, can
be exalted above God as He is in His nature and majesty
(as not worshiped and proclaimed); rather, everything
is under His powerful hand." (E. 221; St. L. 1794.)

God in His majesty is supreme and man cannot
resist His omnipotence, nor thwart His decrees, nor foil
His plans, nor render His omniscience fallible. Luther:
"For all men find this opinion written in their hearts,
and, when hearing this matter discussed, they, though
against their will, acknowledge and assent to it, first, that
God is omnipotent, not only as regards His power, but
also, as stated His action; else He would be a ridiculous
God, secondly, that He knows and foreknows all things,
and can neither err nor be deceived. These two things,
however, being conceded by the hearts and senses of all
men they are presently, by an inevitable consequence,
compelled to admit that, even as we are not made by
our own will, but by necessity, so likewise we do nothing
according to the right of free will,but just as God has
foreknown and acts by a counsel and an energy which
is infallible and immutable. So, then, we find it written
in all hearts alike that free will [defined as a power independent
of God's power] is nothing, although this writing
[in the hearts of men] be obscured through so many
contrary disputations and the great authority of so
many persons who during so many ages have been
teaching differently." (E. 268; St. L. 1851.)

The very idea of God and omnipotence involves
that free will is not, and cannot be, a power independent
of God. Luther: "However, even natural reason is
obliged to confess that the living and true God must be
such a one who by His freedom imposes necessity upon
us, for, evidently, He would be a ridiculous God or,
more properly, an idol, who would either foresee future
events in an uncertain way, or be deceived by the events,
as the Gentiles have asserted an inescapable fate also for
their gods. God would be equally ridiculous if He could
not do or did not do all things, or if anything occurred
without Him.Now, if foreknowledge and omnipotence
are conceded, it naturally follows as an irrefutable consequence
that we have not been made by ourselves, nor
that we live or do anything by ourselves, but through
His omnipotence. Since, therefore,He foreknew that we
should be such [as we actually are], and even now
makes,moves, and governs us as such,pray, what can be
imagined that is free in us so as to occur differently than
He has foreknown or now works? God's foreknowledge
and omnipotence, therefore, conflict directly with our
free will [when defined as a power independent of
God]. For either God will be mistaken in foreknowing,
err also in acting (which is impossible), or we shall act,
and be acted upon, according to His foreknowledge and
action. By the omnipotence of God, however, I do not
mean that power by which He can do many things
which He does not do but that active omnipotence by
means of which He powerfully works all things in all, in
which manner Scripture calls Him omnipotent. This
omnipotence and prescience of God,I say, entirely abolish
the dogma of free will. Nor can the obscurity of
Scripture or the difficulty of the matter be made a pretext
here.The words are most clear, known even to children;
the subject-matter is plain and easy, judged to be
so even by the natural reason common to all, so that
ever so long a series of ages, times, and persons writing
and teaching otherwise will avail nothing."(E. 267; St. L.
1849.)

According to Luther, therefore, nothing can or does
occur independently of God, or differently from what
His omniscience has foreseen. Luther:"Hence it follows
irrefutably that all things which we do, and all things
which happen, although to us they seem to happen
changeably and contingently, do in reality happen necessarily
and immutably, if one views the will of God.For
the will of God is efficacious and cannot be thwarted
since it is God's natural power itself. It is also wise, so
that it cannot be deceived. And since His will is not
thwarted, the work itself cannot be prevented, but must
occur in the very place, time, manner, and degree which
He Himself both foresees and wills."(E. 134; St. L. 1692.)

#### 238. God Not the Cause of Sin.

Regarding God's relation to the sinful actions of
men, Luther held that God is not the cause of sin. True,
His omnipotence impels also the ungodly; but the
resulting acts are evil because of man's evil nature. He
writes:"Since, therefore,God moves and works all in all,
He necessarily moves and acts also in Satan and in the
wicked.But He acts in them precisely according to what
they are and what He finds them to be (agit in illis taliter,
quales illi sunt, et quales invenit). That is to say, since
they are turned away [from Him] and wicked, and [as
such] are impelled to action by divine omnipotence,
they do only such things as are averse [to God] and
wicked, just as a horseman driving a horse which has
only three or two [sound] feet (equum tripedem vel
bipedem) will drive him in a manner corresponding to
the condition of the horse (agit quidem taliter, qualis
equus est), i.e., the horse goes at a sorry gait. But what
can the horseman do? He drives such a horse together
with sound horses, so that it sadly limps along,while the
others take a good gait. He cannot do otherwise unless
the horse is cured. Here you see that when God works
in the wicked and through the wicked, the result indeed
is evil (mala quidem fieri), but that nevertheless God
cannot act wickedly, although He works that which is
evil through the wicked; for He being good, cannot
Himself act wickedly, although He uses evil instruments,
which cannot escape the impulse and motion of
His power. The fault, therefore, is in the instruments,
which God does not suffer to remain idle, so that evil
occurs, God Himself impelling them, but in no other
manner than a carpenter who, using an ax that is
notched and toothed, would do poor work with it.
Hence it is that a wicked man cannot but err and sin
continually,because, being impelled by divine power, he
is not allowed to remain idle, but wills, desires, and acts
according to what he is (velit, cupiat, faciat taliter, qualis
ipse est)." (E. 255; St. L. 1834.) "For although God does
not make sin, still He ceases not to form and to multiply
a nature which, the Spirit having been withdrawn is
corrupted by sin, just as when a carpenter makes statues
of rotten wood. Thus men become what their nature is,
God creating and forming them of such nature." (E.
254; St. L. 1833.)

Though God works all things in all things the
wickedness of an action flows from the sinful nature of
the creature. Luther: "Whoever would have any understanding
of such matters, let him consider that God
works evil in us, i.e. through us, not by any fault of His,
but through our own fault. For since we are by nature
evil, while God is good, and since He impels us to action
according to the nature of His omnipotence, He, who
Himself is good, cannot do otherwise than do evil with
an evil instrument, although, according to His wisdom,
He causes this evil to turn out unto His own glory and
to our salvation." (E. 257; St. L. 1837.) "For this is what
we assert and contend, that, when God works without
the grace of His Spirit [in His majesty, outside ofWord
and Sacrament],He works all in all, even in the wicked;
for He alone moves all things, which He alone has created,
and drives and impels all things by virtue of His
omnipotence, which they [the created things] cannot
escape or change, but necessarily follow and obey,
according to the power which God has given to each of
them-such is the manner in which all, even wicked,
things cooperate with Him. Furthermore, when He acts
by the Spirit of Grace in those whom He has made
righteous, i.e., in His own kingdom, He in like manner
impels and moves them; and, being new creatures, they
follow and cooperate with Him; or rather, as Paul says,
they are led by Him." (E. 317; St. L. 1908.) "For we say
that,without the grace of God, man still remains under
the general omnipotence of God, who does, moves,
impels all things, so that they take their course necessarily
and without fail, but that what man, so impelled,
does, is nothing, i.e., avails nothing before God, and is
accounted nothing but sin." (E. 315; St. L. 1906.)

Though everything occurs as God has foreseen,
this, according to Luther, does not at all involve that
man is coerced in his actions. Luther: "But pray, are we
disputing now concerning coercion and force? Have we
not in so many books testified that we speak of the
necessity of immutability? We know ... that Judas of his
own volition betrayed Christ.But we affirm that, if God
foreknew it, this volition would certainly and without
fail occur in this very Judas ...We are not discussing the
point whether Judas became a traitor unwillingly or
willingly, but whether at the time foreappointed by God
it infallibly had to happen that Judas of his own volition
betrayed Christ." (E. 270; St. L. 1853.) Again: "What is it
to me that free will is not coerced, but does what it does
willingly? It is enough for me to have you concede that
it must necessarily happen, that he [Judas] does what he
does of his own volition, and that he cannot conduct
himself otherwise if God has so foreknown it. If God
foreknows that Judas will betray, or that he will change
his mind about it,-whichever of the two He shall have
foreknown will necessarily come to pass, else God
would be mistaken in foreknowing and foretelling,-
which is impossible. Necessity of consequence effects
this: if God foreknows an event, it necessarily happens.
In other words, free will is nothing" [it is not a power
independent of God or able to nullify God's prescience].
(E. 272; St. L. 1855.)

To wish that God would abstain from impelling the
wicked is, according to Luther, tantamount to wishing
that He cease to be God. Luther:"There is still this question
which some one may ask,'Why does God not cease
to impel by His omnipotence, in consequence of which
the will of the wicked is moved to continue being
wicked and even growing worse?' The answer is: This is
equivalent to desiring that God cease to be God for the
sake of the wicked, since one wishes His power and
action to cease, i.e. that He cease to be good, lest they
become worse!" (E. 259; St. L. 1839.)

#### 239. Free Will a Mere Empty Title.

Luther considers free will (when defined as an ability
in spiritual matters or as a power independent of
God) a mere word without anything corresponding to
it in reality (figmentum in rebus seu titulus sine re, E. v. a.
5, 230), because natural will has powers only in matters
temporal and subject to reason, but none in spiritual
things, and because of itself and independently of God's
omnipotence it has no power whatever.We read: "Now
it follows that free will is a title altogether divine and
cannot belong to any other being, save only divine
majesty, for He, as the Psalmist sings [Ps. 115, {{< hiddenanchor 3 >}}3{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, can do
and does all that He wills in heaven and in earth. Now,
when this title is ascribed to men, it is so ascribed with
no more right than if also divinity itself were ascribed to
them,-a sacrilege than which there is none greater.
Accordingly it was the duty of theologians to abstain
from this word when they intended to speak of human
power, and to reserve it exclusively for God, thereupon
also to remove it from the mouth and discourse of men,
claiming it as a sacred and venerable title for their God.
And if they would at all ascribe some power to man,
they should have taught that it be called by some other
name than 'free will,' especially since we all know and see
that the common people are miserably deceived and led
astray by this term, for by it they hear and conceive
something very far different from what theologians
mean and discuss. 'Free will' is too magnificent, extensive,
and comprehensive a term; by it common people
understand (as also the import and nature of the word
require) a power which can freely turn to either side,
and neither yields nor is subject to any one," (E. 158; St.
L. 1720.)

If the term "free will"be retained, it should, according
to Luther, be conceived of as a power, not in divine
things, but only in matters subject to human reason.We
read: "So, then, according to Erasmus, free will is the
power of the will which is able of itself to will and not to
will the Word and work of God, whereby it is led to
things which exceed both its comprehension and perception.
For if it is able to will and not to will, it is able
also to love and to hate. If it is able to love and to hate, it
is able also, in some small degree, to keep the Law and
to believe the Gospel.For if you will or do not will, a certain
thing, it is impossible that by that will you should
not be able to do something of the work, even though,
when hindered by another, you cannot complete it." (E.
191; St. L. 1759.) "If, then,we are not willing to abandon
this term altogether, which would be the safest and most
pious course to follow, let us at least teach men to use it
in good faith (bona fide) only in the sense that free will
be conceded to man, with respect to such matters only
as are not superior, but inferior to himself, i.e., man is to
know that,with regard to his means and possessions, he
has the right of using, of doing, and of forbearing to do
according to his free will; although also even this is
directed by the free will of God alone whithersoever it
pleases Him. But with respect to God, or in things pertaining
to salvation or damnation, he has no free will,
but is the captive, subject, and servant, either of the will
of God or of the will of Satan." (E. 160; St. L. 1722.)
"Perhaps you might properly attribute some will
(aliquod arbitrium) to man, but to attribute free will to
him in divine things is too much, since in the judgment
of all who hear it the term 'free will' is properly applied
to that which can do and does with respect to God
whatsoever it pleases, without being hindered by any
law or authority.You would not call a slave free who acts
under the authority of his master.With how much less
propriety do we call men or angels truly free,who, to say
nothing of sin and death, live under the most complete
authority of God, unable to subsist for a moment by
their own power." (E. 189; St. L. 1756.)

Lost liberty, says Luther, is no liberty, just as lost
health is no health.We read: "When it has been conceded
and settled that free will, having lost its freedom, is
compelled to serve sin, and has no power to will anything
good, I can conceive nothing else from these
expressions than that free will is an empty word, with
the substance lost. My grammar calls a lost liberty no
liberty. But to attribute the title of liberty to that which
has no liberty is to attribute an empty name. If here I go
astray, let who can correct me; if my words are obscure
and ambiguous, let who can make them plain and definite.
I cannot call health that is lost health. If I should
ascribe it to a sick man, I believe to have ascribed to him
nothing but an empty name. But away with monstrous
words! For who can tolerate that abuse of speech by
which we affirm that man has free will, and in the same
breath assert that he, having lost his liberty, is compelled
to serve sin, and can will nothing good? It conflicts with
common sense, and utterly destroys the use of speech.
The r just such an answer as he gave in accused of blurting
out its words as if it were asleep, and giving no heed to
those of others. It does not consider, I say, what it means,
and what it all includes, if I declare: Man has lost his liberty,
is compelled to serve sin, and has no power to will
anything good." (E. 200; St. L. 1769.)

Satan causes his captives to believe themselves free
and happy. Luther: "The Scriptures set before us a man
who is not only bound, wretched, captive, sick, dead,
but who (through the operation of Satan, his prince)
adds this plague of blindness to his other plagues, that
he believes himself to be free, happy, unfettered, strong,
healthy, alive. For Satan knows that, if man were to realize
his own misery, he would not be able to retain any
one in his kingdom, because God could not but at once
pity and help him who recognizes his misery and cries
for relief.For throughout all Scripture He is extolled and
greatly praised for being nigh unto the contrite in heart,
as also Christ testifies, Isaiah 61, 1. 2, that He has been
sent to preach the Gospel to the poor and to heal the
broken-hearted. Accordingly, it is Satan's business to
keep his grip on men, lest they recognize their misery,
but rather take it for granted that they are able to do
everything that is said." (E. 213; St. L. 1785.)

#### 240. The Gospel to be Our Only Guide.

According to De Servo Arbitrio God's majesty and
His mysterious judgments and ways must not be
searched, nor should speculations concerning them be
made the guide of our faith and life. Luther says: "Of
God or of the will of God proclaimed and revealed, and
offered to us, and which we meditate upon, we must
treat in a different way than of God in so far as He is not
proclaimed, not revealed, and not offered to us, and is
not the object of our meditations. For in so far as God
hides Himself, and desires not to be known of us, we
have nothing to do with Him. Here the saying truly
applies,'What is above us does not concern us.'"(E. 221,
St. L. 1794.) "We say, as we have done before, that one
must not discuss the secret will of [divine] majesty, and
that man's temerity, which, due to continual perverseness,
disregards necessary matters and always attacks
and encounters this [secret will], should be called away
and withdrawn from occupying itself with scrutinizing
those secrets of divine majesty which it is impossible to
approach; for it dwells 'in the light which no man can
approach unto,' as Paul testifies, 1 Tim. 6, 16."(E. 227; St.
L. 1801.) This statement, that God's majesty must not
be investigated, says Luther,"is not our invention, but an
injunction confirmed by Holy Scripture. For Paul says
Rom. 9, 19¡V21: 'Why doth God yet find fault? For who
hath resisted His will? Nay but, O man, who art thou
that repliest against God? ...Hath not the potter power,'
etc.? And before him Isaiah, chapter 58, 2: 'Yet they seek
Me daily, and delight to know My ways, as a nation that
did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of
their God. They ask of Me the ordinances of justice;
they take delight in approaching to God,'These words, I
take it, show abundantly that it is unlawful for men to
scrutinize the will of majesty." (E. 228; St. L. 1803.)

Instead of searching the Scriptures, as they are commanded
to do, men unlawfully crave to investigate the
hidden judgments of God. We read: "But we are
nowhere more irreverent and rash than when we invade
and argue these very mysteries and judgments which
are unsearchable. Meanwhile we imagine that we are
exercising incredible reverence in searching the Holy
Scriptures, which God has commanded us to search.
Here we do not search, but where He has forbidden us
to search, there we do nothing but search with perpetual
temerity, not to say blasphemy. Or is it not such a
search when we rashly endeavor to make that wholly
free foreknowledge of God accord with our liberty, and
are ready to detract from the prescience of God, if it
does not allow us liberty, or if it induces necessity, to say
with the murmurers and blasphemers, 'Why doth He
find fault? Who shall resist His will? What is become of
the most merciful God? What of Him who wills not the
death of the sinner? Has He made men that He might
delight Himself with their torments?' and the like,
which will be howled out forever among the devils and
the damned." (E. 266, St. L. 1848.)

God's unknowable will is not and cannot be our
guide. Luther: "The Diatribe beguiles herself through
her ignorance, making no distinction between the proclaimed
and the hidden God, that is between the Word
of God and God Himself. God does many things which
He has not shown us in His Word. He also wills many
things concerning which He has not shown us in His
Word that He wills them. For instance,He does not will
the death of a sinner namely, according to His Word,
but He wills it according to His inscrutable will. Now,
our business is to look at His Word, disregarding the
inscrutable will; for we must be directed by the Word,
not by that inscrutable will (nobis spectandum est
Verbum relinquendaque illa voluntas imperscrutabilis;
Verbo enim nos dirigi, non voluntate illa inscrutabili
oportet) . Indeed, who could direct himself by that
inscrutable and unknowable will? It is enough merely to
know that there is such an inscrutable will in God; but
what,why, and how far it wills, that is altogether unlawful
for us to inquire into, to wish [to know], and to trouble
or occupy ourselves with; on the contrary,we should
fear and adore it." (E. 222; St. L.1795)

Instead of investigating the mysteries of divine
majesty, men ought to concern themselves with God's
revelation in the Gospel. Luther: "But let her [human
temerity] occupy herself with the incarnate God or, as
Paul says, with Jesus Crucified, in whom are hidden all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. For through
Him she has abundantly what she ought to know and
not to know. It is the incarnate God, then, who speaks
here [Matt. {{< hiddenanchor 23 >}}23{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'I would, and thou wouldest not.' The
incarnate God, I say, was sent for this purpose, that He
might will, speak, do, suffer, and offer to all men all
things which are necessary to salvation, although He
offends very many who, being either abandoned or
hardened by that secret will of His majesty, do not
receive Him who wills, speaks, works, offers, even as
John says: 'The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness
comprehendeth it not;' and again: 'He came unto
His own and His own received Him not.' " (E. 227f., St.
L. 1802.)

#### 241. God's Grace Is Universal and Serious.

All men are in need of the saving Gospel, and it
should be preached to all. We read in De Servo Arbitrio:
"Paul had said just before: 'The Gospel is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the
Jew first and also to the Greek,' These words are not
obscure or ambiguous: 'To the Jews and to the Greeks,'
that is, to all men, the Gospel of the power of God is
necessary, in order that, believing, they may be saved
from the revealed wrath." (E. 322; St. L. 1915.) "He
[God] knows what, when, how, and to whom we ought
to speak.Now,His injunction is that His Gospel,which
is necessary for all, should be limited by neither place
nor time, but be preached to all, at all times, and in all
places." (E. 149; St. L. 1709.)

The universal promises of the Gospel offer firm
and sweet consolation to poor sinners. Luther: "It is the
voice of the Gospel and the sweetest consolation to poor
miserable sinners when Ezekiel says [18, 23. {{< hiddenanchor 32 >}}32{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'I have
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he
be converted and live,' Just so also the thirtieth Psalm [v.
{{< hiddenanchor 5 >}}5{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'For His anger endureth but a moment; in His favor
is life [His will rather is life].'And the sixty-ninth [v. {{< hiddenanchor 16 >}}16{{< /hiddenanchor >}}:
'For Thy loving-kindness is good [How sweet is Thy
mercy, Lord!]' Also: 'Because I am merciful,' And that
saying of Christ,Matt. 11, 28:'Come unto Me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,' Also
that of Exodus [20, {{< hiddenanchor 6 >}}6{{< /hiddenanchor >}},'I show mercy unto thousands of
them that love Me,' Indeed, almost more than half of
Holy Scripture,-what is it but genuine promises of
grace, by which mercy, life, peace, and salvation are
offered by God to men? And what else do the words of
promise sound forth than this:'I have no pleasure in the
death of a sinner'? Is it not the same thing to say, 'I am
merciful,' as to say, 'I am not angry,' 'I do not wish to
punish,' 'I do not wish you to die,' 'I desire to pardon,' 'I
desire to spare'? Now, if these divine promises did not
stand [firm], so as to raise up afflicted consciences terrified
by the sense of sin and the fear of death and judgment,
what place would there be for pardon or for
hope? What sinner would not despair?" (E. 218; St. L.
1791.)

God, who would have all men to be saved deplores
and endeavors to remove death, so that man must
blame himself if he is lost. Luther: "God in His majesty
and nature therefore must be left untouched
[unsearched] for in this respect we have nothing to do
with Him, nor did He want us to deal with Him in this
respect; but we deal with Him in so far as He has clothed
Himself and come forth in His Word, by which He has
offered Himself to us. This [Word] is His glory and
beauty with which the Psalmist, 21, 6, celebrates Him as
being clothed." Emphasizing the seriousness of universal
grace, Luther continues: "Therefore we affirm that
the holy God does not deplore the death of the people
which He works in them, but deplores the death which
He finds in the people, and endeavors to remove (sed
deplorat mortem, quam invenit in populo, et amovere
studet). For this is the work of the proclaimed God to
take away sin and death, that we may be saved. For He
has sent His Word and healed them." (E. 222; St. L.
1795.) "Hence it is rightly said, If God wills not death, it
must be charged to our own will that we perish.
'Rightly,' I say, if you speak of the proclaimed God. For
He would have all men to be saved, coming, as He does,
with His Word of salvation to all men; and the fault is in
the will, which does not admit Him, as He says, Matt.
23, 37: 'How often would I have gathered thy children
together, and ye would not!'" (E. 222: St. L. 1795.)

#### 242. Sola gratia Doctrine Engenders Assurance.

Luther rejoices in the doctrine of sola gratia because
it alone is able to engender assurance of salvation. He
writes: "As for myself, I certainly confess that, if such a
thing could somehow be, I should be unwilling to have
free will given me, or anything left in my own hand,
which might enable me to make an effort at salvation;
not only because in the midst of so many dangers and
adversities and also of so many assaulting devils I
should not be strong enough to remain standing and
keep my hold of it (for one devil is mightier than all
men put together, and not a single man would be
saved), but because, even if there were no dangers and
no adversities and no devils, I should still be compelled
to toil forever uncertainly, and to beat the air in my
struggle. For though I should live and work to eternity,
my own conscience would never be sure and at ease as
to how much it ought to do in order to satisfy God.No
matter how perfect a work might be, there would be left
a doubt whether it pleased God, or whether He required
anything more, as is proved by the experience of all who
endeavor to be saved by the Law (iustitiariorum), and as
I, to my own great misery,have learned abundantly during
so many years.But now, since God has taken my salvation
out of the hands of my will, and placed it into
those of His own and has promised to save me, not by
my own work or running, but by His grace and mercy,
I feel perfectly secure, because He is faithful and will not
lie to me; moreover, He is powerful and great, so that
neither devils nor adversities can crush Him, or pluck
me out of His hand. No one, says He, shall pluck them
out of My hand; for My Father, who gave them unto
Me, is greater than all. Thus it comes to pass that,
though not all are saved, at least some, nay, many are,
whereas by the power of free will absolutely none would
be saved, but every one of us would be lost.We are also
certain and sure that we please God, not by the merit of
our own work, but by the favor of His mercy which He
has promised us, and that, if we have done less than we
ought, or have done anything amiss, He does not
impute it to us, but, as a father, forgives and amends it.
Such is the boast of every saint in his God." (E. 362; St.
L. 1961f.)

In the Apology of the Augsburg Confession this
thought of Luther's is repeated as follows: "If the matter
[our salvation] were to depend upon our merits, the
promise would be uncertain and useless, because we
never could determine when we would have sufficient
merit. And this experienced consciences can easily
understand [and would not, for a thousand worlds,
have our salvation depend upon ourselves]." (CONC.
TRIGL. 145, 84, compare 1079, 45f.)

#### 243. Truth of God's Majesty Serves God's Gracious Will.

Luther regarded the teaching that everything is
subject to God's majesty as being of service to His gracious
will.We read:"Two things require the preaching of
these truths [concerning the infallibility of God's foreknowledge,
etc.]; the first is, the humbling of our pride
and the knowledge of the grace of God; the second,
Christian faith itself. First, God has certainly promised
His grace to the humbled i.e., to those who deplore their
sins and despair [of themselves]. But man cannot be
thoroughly humbled until he knows that his salvation is
altogether beyond his own powers, counsels, efforts,
will, and works, and depends altogether upon the decision,
counsel, will, and work of another, i.e., of God
only. For as long as he is persuaded that he can do anything
toward gaining salvation, though it be ever so little,
he continues in self-confidence, and does not wholly
despair of himself; accordingly he is not humbled
before God, but anticipates, or hopes for, or at least
wishes for, a place, a time, and some work by which he
may finally obtain salvation." (E. 153. 133, St. L. 1715
1691.) "More than once," says Luther, "I myself have
been offended at it [the teaching concerning God's
majesty] to such an extent that I was at the brink of
despair, so that I even wished I had never been created a
man,-until I learned how salutary that despair was
and how close to grace." (E. 268; St. L. 1850.)

Of the manner in which, according to Luther, the
truth concerning God's majesty serves the Gospel, we
read:"Moreover, I do not only wish to speak of how true
these things are, ... but also how becoming to a
Christian, how pious, and how necessary it is to know
them. For if these things are not known, it is impossible
for either faith or any worship of God to be maintained.
That would be ignorance of God indeed; and if we do
not know Him, we cannot obtain salvation, as is well
known. For if you doubt that God foreknows and wills
all things, not contingently, but necessarily and
immutably, or if you scorn such knowledge, how will
you be able to believe His promises, and with full assurance
trust and rely upon them? When He promises, you
ought to be sure that He knows what He is promising,
and is able and willing to accomplish it, else you will
account Him neither true nor faithful. That, however, is
unbelief, extreme impiety, and a denial of the most high
God. But how will you be confident and sure if you do
not know that He certainly, infallibly,unchangeably,and
necessarily knows, and wills, and will perform what He
promises? Nor should we merely be certain that God
necessarily and immutably wills and will perform [what
He has promised], but we should even glory in this very
thing, as Paul does, Rom. 3, 4: 'Let God be true, but
every man a liar.' And again, Rom. 9, 6; 4, 21; 1 Sam. 3,
19: 'Not that the Word of God hath taken none effect.'
And in another place, 2 Tim. 2, 19: 'The foundation of
God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth
them that are His.' And in Titus 1, 2: 'Which God, that
cannot lie, hath promised before the world began.'And
in Heb. 11, 6:'He that cometh to God must believe that
God is, and that He is a rewarder of them that hope in
Him,' So, then, Christian faith is altogether extinguished,
the promises of God and the entire Gospel fall
absolutely to the ground, if we are taught and believe
that we have no need of knowing the foreknowledge of
God to be necessary and the necessity of all things that
must be done. For this is the only and highest possible
consolation of Christians in all adversities to know that
God does not lie, but does all things immutably, and
that His will can neither be resisted, nor altered, nor
hindered." (E. 137. 264; St. L. 1695. 1845.)

#### 244. There Are No Real Contradictions in God.

Among the mysteries which we are unable to solve
Luther enumerates the questions:Why did God permit
the fall of Adam? Why did He suffer us to be infected
with original sin? Why does God not change the evil
will? Why is it that some are converted while others are
lost? We read: "But why does He not at the same time
change the evil will which He moves? This pertains to
the secrets of His majesty, where His judgments are
incomprehensible. Nor is it our business to investigate,
but to adore these mysteries. If, therefore, flesh and
blood here take offense and murmur, let them murmur;
but they will effect nothing,God will not be changed on
that account. And if the ungodly are scandalized and
leave in ever so great numbers, the elect will nevertheless
remain. The same answer should be given to those
who ask,'Why did He allow Adam to fall, and why does
He create all of us infected with the same sin when He
could have preserved him [Adam], and created us from
something else, or after first having purged the seed?'He
is God, for whose will there is no cause or reason which
might be prescribed for it as a standard and rule of
action; for it has no equal or superior, but is itself the
rule for everything. If it had any rule or standard, cause
or reason, it could no longer be the will of God. For
what He wills is right, not because He is or was in duty
bound so to will, but, on the contrary, because He wills
so, therefore what occurs must be right. Cause and reason
are prescribed to a creature's will, but not to the will
of the Creator, unless you would set another Creator
over Him." (E. 259; St. L. 1840.)

Regarding the question why some are converted
while others are not, we read: "But why this majesty
does not remove this fault of our will, or change it in all
men (seeing that it is not in the power of man to do so),
or why He imputes this [fault of the will] to man when
he cannot be without it, it is not lawful to search, and
although you search much, you will never discover it, as
Paul says, Rom. 9, 20: 'O man, who art thou that repliest
against God?' " (E. 223, St. L. 1796.) "But as to why
some are touched by the Law and others are not, so that
the former receive, and the latter despise, the grace
offered, this is another question, and one not treated by
Ezekiel in this place, who speaks of the preached and
offered mercy of God, not of the secret and to-be-feared
will of God, who by His counsel ordains what and what
kind of persons He wills to be capable and partakers of
His preached and offered mercy. This will of God must
not be searched, but reverently adored, as being by far
the most profound and sacred secret of divine majesty,
reserved for Himself alone, and prohibited to us much
more religiously than countless multitudes of Corycian
Caves." (E. 221; St. L. 1794.)

Christians firmly believe that in His dealings with
men God is always wise and just and good. Luther:
"According to the judgment of reason it remains absurd
that this just and good God should demand things that
are impossible of fulfilment by free will, and, although it
cannot will that which is good but necessarily serves sin,
should nevertheless charge this to free will; and that,
when He does not confer the Spirit,He should not act a
whit more kindly or more mercifully than when He
hardens or permits men to harden themselves. Reason
will declare that these are not the acts of a kind and
merciful God. These things exceed her understanding
too far, nor can she take herself into captivity to believe
God to be good, who acts and judges thus; but setting
faith aside, she wants to feel and see and comprehend
how He is just and not cruel. She would indeed comprehend
if it were said of God:'He hardens nobody,He
damns nobody, rather pities everybody, saves everybody,'
so that, hell being destroyed and the fear of death
removed, no future punishment need be dreaded. This
is the reason why she is so hot in striving to excuse and
defend God as just and good. But faith and the spirit
judge differently, believing God to be good though he were
to destroy all men."(E. 252, St. L. 1832.) "The reason why
of the divine will must not be investigated, but simply
adored, and we must give the glory to God that, being
alone just and wise, He does wrong to none, nor can He
do anything foolish or rash, though it may appear far otherwise
to us. Godly men are content with this answer." (E.
153; St. L. 1714.)

According to Luther, divine justice must be just as
incomprehensible to human reason as God's entire
essence. We read: "But when we feel ill at ease for the
reason that it is difficult to vindicate the mercy and
equity of God because He damns the undeserving, i.e.
such ungodly men as are born in ungodliness, and
hence cannot in any way prevent being and remaining
ungodly and damned, and are compelled by their
nature to sin and perish, as Paul says [Eph. 2, {{< hiddenanchor 3 >}}3{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'We
were all the sons of wrath even as others,' they being created
such by God Himself out of the seed which was
corrupted through the sin of the one Adam,-then the
most merciful God is to be honored and revered in [His
dealings with] those whom He justifies and saves,
although they are most unworthy, and at least a little
something ought to be credited to His divine wisdom
by believing Him to be just where to us He seems
unjust. For if His justice were such as could be declared
just by human understanding, it would clearly not be
divine, differing nothing from human justice. But since
He is the one true God, and entirely incomprehensible
and inaccessible to human reason, it is proper, nay, necessary,
that His justice also be incomprehensible, even as
Paul also exclaims, Rom. 11, 33, saying: 'O the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways
past finding out!' Now, they would not be incomprehensible
if we were able, in everything He does, to comprehend
why they are just.What is man compared with
God? How much is our power capable of as compared
with His? What is our strength compared with His powers?
What is our knowledge compared with His wisdom?
What is our substance compared with His substance?
In short,what is everything that is ours as compared
with everything that is His?" (E. 363; St. L. 1962.)

Christians embrace the opportunity offered by the
mysterious ways of God to exercise their faith. Luther:
"This is the highest degree of faith, to believe that He is
merciful, who saves so few and condemns so many, to
believe Him just,who by His will [creating us out of sinful
seed] necessarily makes us damnable, thus, according
to Erasmus, seeming to be delighted with the torments
of the wretched, and worthy of hatred rather
than of love. If, then, I could in any way comprehend
how this God is merciful and just who shows such great
wrath and [seeming] injustice, there would be no need
of faith. But now, since this cannot be comprehended
there is to be an opportunity for the exercise of faith
when these things are preached and published, even as
when God kills, our faith in life is exercised in death."(E.
154; St. L. 1716.)

#### 245. Seeming Contradictions Solved in Light of Glory.

Christians are fully satisfied that hereafter they will
see and understand what they here believed, viz., that in
His dealings with men God truly is and always was
absolutely just. Luther: "If you are pleased with God for
crowning the unworthy, you ought not to be displeased
with Him for condemning the undeserving [who were
not worse or more guilty than those who are crowned].
If He is just in the former case, why not in the latter? In
the former case He scatters favor and mercy upon the
unworthy, in the latter He scatters wrath and severity
upon the undeserving [who are guilty in no higher
degree than those who are saved]. In both cases He is
excessive and unrighteous before [in the judgment of]
men but just and true in His own mind. For how it is
just that He crowns the unworthy is incomprehensible
to us now; but we shall understand it when we have
come to that place where we shall no longer believe, but
behold with our face unveiled. So, too, how it is just that
He condemns the undeserving we cannot comprehend
now, yet we believe it until the Son of Man shall be
revealed." (E. 284; St. L. 1870.) "Of course, in all other
things we concede divine majesty to God; only in His
judgment we are ready to deny it, and cannot even for a
little while believe that He is just, since He has promised
us that, when he will reveal His glory, we all shall then
both see and feel that He has been, and is, just." (E. 364;
St. L. 1964.)

Again: "Do you not think that since the light of
grace has so readily solved a question which could not
be solved by the light of nature, the light of glory will be
able to solve with the greatest ease the question which in
the light of the Word or of grace is unsolvable? In accordance
with the common and good distinction let it be
conceded that there are three lights-the light of nature,
the light of grace, and the light of glory. In the light of
nature it is unsolvable that it should be just that the
good are afflicted while the wicked prosper. The light of
grace, however, solves this [mystery]. In the light of
grace it is unsolvable how God may condemn him who
cannot by any power of his own do otherwise than sin
and be guilty. There the light of nature as well as the
light of grace declares that the fault is not in wretched
man, but in the unjust God. For they cannot judge otherwise
of God, who crowns a wicked man gratuitously
without any merits, and does not crown another, but
condemns him, who perhaps is less, or at least not more
wicked [than the one who is crowned]. But the light of
glory pronounces a different verdict, and when it arrives,
it will show God, whose judgment is now that of
incomprehensible justice, to be a Being of most just and
manifest justice, which meanwhile we are to believe,
admonished and confirmed by the example of the light
of grace, which accomplishes a like miracle with respect
to the light of nature." (E. 365; St. L. 1965.)

#### 246. Statements Made by Luther before Publication of "De Servo Arbitrio."

Wherever Luther touches on predestination both
before and after 1525, essentially the same thoughts are
found, though not developed as extensively as in De
Servo Arbitrio. He consistently maintains that God's
majesty must be neither denied nor searched, and that
Christians should be admonished to look and rely solely
upon the revealed universal promises of the Gospel.
In his Church Postil of 1521 we read: "The third class of
men who also approve this [the words of Paul,Rom. 11,
34. 35: 'For who hath known the mind of the Lord? Or
who hath been His counselor? Or who hath first given
to Him, and it shall be recompensed unto Him again?']
are those who indeed hear the Word of Revelation. For
I am not now speaking of such as deliberately persecute
the Word (they belong to the first class, who do not at
all inquire about God) but of those who disregard the
revelation and led by the devil, go beyond and beside it,
seeking to grasp the ways and judgments of God which
He has not revealed. Now, if they were Christians, they
would be satisfied and thank God for giving His Word,
in which He shows what is pleasing to Him, and how we
are to be saved. But they suffer the devil to lead them,
insist on seeking other revelations, ponder what God
may be in His invisible majesty,how He secretly governs
the world, and what He has in particular decreed for
each one in the future. For nature and human reason
cannot desist; they will meddle in His judgment with
their wisdom, sit in His most secret council, instruct
Him and master Him. This is the pride of the foul fiend,
who was cast into the abyss of hell for trying to meddle
in [matters of] divine majesty, and who in the same way
eagerly seeks to bring man to fall, and to cast him down
with himself, as he did in Paradise in the beginning,
tempting also the saints and even Christ with the same
thing, when he set Him on the pinnacle of the Temple,
etc. Against such in particular St. Paul here introduces
these words [Rom. 11, 34. {{< hiddenanchor 35 >}}35{{< /hiddenanchor >}} to the inquisitive questions
of wise reason: Why did God thus punish and
reject the Jews while He permitted the condemned heathen
to come to the Gospel? Again,Why does He govern
on this wise, that wicked and evil men are exalted
while the pious are allowed to undergo misfortune and
be suppressed? Why does He call Judas to be an apostle
and later on reject him while He accepts the murderer
and malefactor? By them [his words, Rom. {{< hiddenanchor 11 >}}11{{< /hiddenanchor >}} Paul
would order such to cease climbing up to the secret
Majesty, and to adhere to the revelation which God has
given us. For such searching and climbing is not only in
vain, but also harmful. Though you search in all eternity,
you will never attain anything, but only break your
neck."

"But if you desire to proceed in the right way, you
can do no better than busying yourself with His Word
and works, in which He has revealed Himself and permits
Himself to be heard and apprehended, to wit, how
He sets before you His Son Christ upon the cross. That
is the work of your redemption. There you can certainly
apprehend God, and see that He does not wish to
condemn you on account of your sins if you believe,but
to give you eternal life, as Christ says: 'God so loved the
world that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life,' (John 3, 16.) In this Christ, says Paul, are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. (Col. 2, 3.)
And that will be more than enough for you to learn,
study, and consider. This lofty revelation of God will
also make you marvel and will engender a desire and
love for God. It is a work which in this life you will never
finish studying; a work of which, as Peter says, even the
angels cannot see enough, but which they contemplate
unceasingly with joy and delight. (1 Pet. 1, 12.)"

"This I say that we may know how to instruct and
direct those (if such we should meet with) who are
being afflicted and tormented by such thoughts of the
devil to tempt God, when he entices them to search the
devious ways of God outside of revelation, and to grope
about trying to fathom what God plans for them-
whereby they are led into such doubt and despair that
they know not how they will survive. Such people must
be reminded of these words [Rom. {{< hiddenanchor 11 >}}11{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, and be rebuked
with them (as St. Paul rebukes his Jews and wiseacres)
for seeking to apprehend God with their wisdom and to
school Him, as His advisers and masters, and for dealing
with Him by themselves without means, and for
giving Him so much that He must requite them again.
For nothing will come of it; He has carefully built so
high that you will not thus scale Him by your climbing.
His wisdom, counsel, and riches are so great that you
will never be able to fathom or to exhaust them.
Therefore be glad that He permits you to know and
receive these things somewhat by revelation." (E. 9, 15
sqq.; St. L. 12, 641 sqq.)

In a sermon on 2 Pet. 1, 10, delivered in 1523 and
published in 1524, Luther said: "Here a limit [beyond
which we may not go] has been set for us how to treat
of predestination.Many frivolous spirits, who have not
felt much of faith, tumble in, strike at the top, concerning
themselves first of all with this matter, and seek to
determine by means of their reason whether they are
elected in order to be certain of their standing. From
this you must desist, it is not the hilt of the matter. If you
would be certain, you must attain to this goal by taking
the way which Peter here proposes. Take another, and
you have already gone astray; your own experience
must teach you. If faith is well exercised and stressed,
you will finally become sure of the matter, so that you
will not fail." (E. 52, 224, St. L. 9, 1353.)

After a discussion at Wittenberg with a fanatic from
Antwerp, in 1525, Luther wrote a letter of warning to
the Christians of Antwerp, in which he speaks of God's
will with respect to sin in an illuminating manner as follows:
"Most of all he [the fanatic] fiercely contended
that God's command was good, and that God did not
desire sin, which is true without a doubt; and the fact
that we also confessed this did not do us any good. But
he would not admit that, although God does not desire
sin, He nevertheless permits (verhaengxt) it to happen,
and such permission certainly does not come to pass
without His will. For who compels Him to permit it?
Aye, how could He permit it if it was not His will to permit
it? Here he exalted his reason, and sought to comprehend
how God could not desire sin, and still, by permitting
sin, will it, imagining that he could exhaust the
abyss of divine majesty: how these two wills may exist
side by side ... Nor do I doubt that he will quote me to
you as saying that God desires sin. To this I would herewith
reply that he wrongs me, and as he is otherwise full
of lies, so also he does not speak the truth in this matter.
I say that God has forbidden sin, and does not desire it.
This will has been revealed to us, and it is necessary for
us to know it. But in what manner God permits or wills
sin, this we are not to know; for He has not revealed it.
St. Paul himself would not and could not know it, saying,
Rom. 9, 20: 'O man, who art thou that repliest
against God?' Therefore I beseech you in case this spirit
should trouble you much with the lofty question
regarding the secret will of God,to depart from him and
to speak thus: 'Is it too little that God instructs us in His
public [proclaimed] will, which He has revealed to us?
Why, then, do you gull us seeking to lead us into that
which we are forbidden to know, are unable to know,
and which you do not know yourself? Let the manner in
which that comes to pass be commended to God; it suffices
us to know that He desires no sin. In what way,
however, He permits or wills sin, this we shall leave
unanswered (sollen wir gehen lassen). The servant is not
to know his master's secrets but what his master enjoins
upon him, much less is a poor creature to explore and
desire to know the secrets of the majesty of its God,'-
Behold,my dear friends, here you may perceive that the
devil always makes a practise of presenting unnecessary,
vain, and impossible things in order thereby to tempt
the frivolous to forsake the right path. Therefore take
heed that you abide by that which is needful, and which
God has commanded us to know, as the wise man says:
'Do not inquire for that which is too high for you, but
always remain with that which God has commanded
you,'We all have work enough to learn all our lifetime
God's command and His Son Christ." (E. 53, 345; St. L.
10, 1531;Weimar 18, 549f.)

#### 247. Statements Made by Luther in 1528.

In a letter of comfort written July 20, 1528, Luther
says: "A few days ago my dear brother Caspar Cruciger,
Doctor of Divinity, informed me with grief that on his
various visitations he learned from your friends that
you are afflicted with abnormal and strange thoughts
pertaining to God's predestination, and are completely
confused by them; also that you grow dull and distracted
on account of them, and that finally it must be feared
that you might commit suicide,-from which Almighty
God may preserve you! ... Your proposition and complaints
are: God Almighty knows from eternity who are
to be and who will be saved, be they dead, living or still
to live in days to come,-which is true, and shall and
must be conceded; for He knows all things, and there is
nothing hidden from Him, since He has counted and
knows exactly the drops in the sea, the stars in the heavens,
the roots, branches, twigs, leaves of all trees, also all
the hair of men. From this you finally conclude that, do
what you will, good or evil, God still knows whether you
shall be saved or not (which is indeed true) yet, at the
same time, you think more of damnation than of salvation
and on that account you are faint-hearted, nor do
you know how God is minded toward you; hence you
grow dispirited and altogether doubtful."

"Against this I, as a servant of my dear Lord Jesus
Christ, give you this advice and comfort, that you may
know how God Almighty is disposed toward you,
whether you are elected unto salvation or damnation.
Although God Almighty knows all things, and all works
and thoughts in all creatures must come to pass according
to His will (iuxta decretum voluntatis suae), it is nevertheless
His earnest will and purpose, aye, His command,
decreed from eternity, to save all men and make
them partakers of eternal joy, as is clearly stated Ezek.
18, 23, where He says: God does not desire the death of
the wicked but that the wicked turn and live.Now, if He
desires to save and to have saved the sinners who live
and move under the wide and high heaven, then you
must not separate yourself from the grace of God by
your foolish thoughts, inspired by the devil. For God's
grace extends and stretches from east to west from
south to north, overshadowing all who turn, truly
repent, and make themselves partakers of His mercy
and desire help. For He is 'rich unto all that call upon
Him,'Rom. 10, 12. This, however requires true and genuine
faith, which expels such faint-heartedness and
despair and is our righteousness, as it is written Rom. 3,
22: 'the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus
Christ unto all and upon all.' Mark these words, in
omnes, super omnes (unto all, upon all), whether you
also belong to them, and are one of those who lie and
grovel under the banner of the sinners." "Think also as
constantly and earnestly of salvation as you [now] do of
damnation, and comfort yourself with God's Word,
which is true and everlasting, then such ill winds will
cease and pass entirely."

"Thus we are to comfort our hearts and consciences, silence and resist the evil thoughts by and with
the divine Scriptures. For one must not speculate about
God's Word, but be still, drop reason and, holding the
Word to be true, believe it, and not cast it to the winds,
nor give the Evil Spirit so much power as to suffer ourselves
to be overcome, and thus to sink and perish. For
the Word, by which all things and creatures in all the
wide world, no matter what they are called, have been
created and made and by which all that lives and moves
is still richly preserved, is true and eternal; and it must
be accounted and held to be greater and more important,
mightier and more powerful than the fluttering,
empty, and vain thoughts which the devil inspires in
men. For the Word is true, but the thoughts of men are
useless and vain. One must also think thus: God
Almighty has not created, predestinated, and elected us
to perdition, but to salvation, as Paul asserts, Eph. 1, 4;
nor should we begin to dispute about God's predestination
from the Law or reason, but from the grace of God
and the Gospel,which is proclaimed to all men.""Hence
these and similar thoughts about God's predestination
must be judged and decided from the Word of God's
grace and mercy.When this is done, there remains no
room or occasion for a man thus to pester and torment
himself,-which neither avails anything even if he
should draw the marrow out of his bones, leaving only
skin and hair." (E. 54, 21ff.)

#### 248. Statements Made by Luther in 1531 and 1533.

In a letter of comfort, dated April 30, 1531, Luther
refers to the fact that he, too, had passed through temptation
concerning predestination. "For," says he, "I am
well acquainted with this malady, having lain in this
hospital sick unto eternal death.Now, in addition to my
prayer I would gladly advise and comfort you, though
writing is weak in such an affair. However, I shall not
omit what I am able to do (perhaps God will bless it),
and show you how God helped me out of this affliction,
and by what art I still daily maintain myself against it. In
the first place, you must; be firmly assured in your heart
that such thoughts are without doubt the inspiration
and the fiery darts of the foul fiend ...Hence it is certain
that they do not proceed from God, but from the devil,
who therewith plagues a heart that man may become an
enemy of God and despair,-all of which God has
strictly forbidden in the First Commandment, bidding
men to trust, love, and praise Him-whereby we live.
Secondly:When such thoughts come to you, you must
learn to ask yourself, 'Friend, in what commandment is
it written that I must think or treat of this?' ... Fourthly:
The chief of all the commandments of God is that we
picture before our eyes His dear Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ.He is to be the daily and the chief mirror of our
heart, in which we see how dear we are to God, and how
much He has cared for us as a good God, so that He
even gave His dear Son for us."

"Here, here, I say, and nowhere else, a man can
learn the true art of predestination. Then it will come to
pass that you believe on Christ.And if you believe, then
you are called; if you are called, then you are also surely
predestinated. Do not suffer this mirror and throne of
grace to be plucked from the eyes of your heart. On the
contrary when such thoughts come and bite like fiery
serpents, then under no circumstances look at the
thoughts or the fiery serpents, but turn your eyes away
from them and look upon the brazen serpent, i.e.,
Christ delivered for us. Then, by the grace of God, matters
will mend." (St. L. 10, 1744 sq.; E. 54, 228.)

In Luther's House Postil of 1533 we read: "From the
last passage: 'Many are called, but few are chosen,'
wiseacres draw various false and ungodly conclusions.
They argue:He whom God has elected is saved without
means; but as for him who is not elected, may he do
what he will, be as pious and believing as he will, it is
nevertheless ordained that he must fall and cannot be
saved; hence I will let matters take what course they will.
If I am to be saved, it is accomplished without my assistance;
if not, all I may do and undertake is nevertheless
in vain.Now every one may readily see for himself what
sort of wicked, secure people develop from such
thoughts. However, in treating of the passage from the
Prophet Micah on the day of Epiphany, we have sufficiently
shown that one must guard against such
thoughts as against the devil, undertake another manner
of studying and thinking of God's will, and let God
in His majesty and with respect to election untouched
[unsearched]; for there He is incomprehensible. Nor is
it possible that a man should not be offended by such
thoughts, and either fall into despair or become altogether
wicked and reckless."

"But whoever would know God and His will aright
must walk the right way. Then he will not be offended,
but be made better. The right way, however, is the Lord
Jesus Christ, as He says:'No one cometh unto the Father
but by Me,' Whoever knows the Father aright and
would come unto Him must first come to Christ and
learn to know Him, viz., as follows: Christ is God's Son,
and is almighty, eternal God.What does the Son of God
now do? He becomes man for our sakes, is made under
the Law to redeem us from the Law, and was Himself
crucified in order to pay for our sins. He rises again
from the dead, in order by His resurrection to pave the
way to eternal life for us, and to aid us against eternal
death.He sits at the right hand of God in order to represent
us, to give us the Holy Spirit, to govern and lead
us by Him, and to protect His believers against all tribulations
and insinuations of Satan. That means knowing
Christ rightly."

"Now when this knowledge has been clearly and
firmly established in your heart, then begin to ascend
into heaven and make this conclusion: Since the Son of
God has done this for the sake of men, how, then,must
God's heart be disposed to us, seeing that His Son did it
by the Father's will and command? Is it not true that
your own reason will compel you to say: Since God has
thus delivered His only-begotten Son for us, and has not
spared Him for our sakes,He surely cannot harbor evil
intentions against us? Evidently He does not desire our
death, for He seeks and employs the very best means
toward assisting us to obtain eternal life. In this manner
one comes to God in the right way, as Christ Himself
declares, John 3, 16: God so loved the world that He gave
His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Now
contrast these thoughts with those that grow out of the
former opinion, and they will be found to be the
thoughts of the foul fiend, which must offend a man,
causing him either to despair, or to become reckless and
ungodly, since he can expect nothing good from God."

"Some conceive other thoughts, explaining the
words thus: 'Many are called', i.e., God offers His grace
to many, but few are chosen, i.e.,He imparts such grace
to only a few; for only a few are saved. This is an altogether
wicked explanation.For how is it possible for one
who holds and believes nothing else of God not to be an
enemy of God, whose will alone must be blamed for the
fact that not all of us are saved? Contrast this opinion
with the one that is formed when a man first learns to
know the Lord Christ, and it will be found to be nothing
but devilish blasphemy.Hence the sense of this passage,
'Many are called,' etc., is far different. For the
preaching of the Gospel is general and public, so that
whoever will may hear and accept it. Furthermore, God
has it preached so generally and publicly that every one
should hear, believe, and accept it, and be saved. But
what happens? As the Gospel states: 'Few are chosen,'
i.e., few conduct themselves toward the Gospel in such
a manner that God has pleasure in them. For some do
not hear and heed it; others hear it, but do not cling to
it, being loath either to risk or suffer anything for it; still
others hear it, but are more concerned about money
and goods, or the pleasures of the world. This, however,
is displeasing to God, who has no pleasure in such people.
This Christ calls 'not to be chosen,' i.e., conducting
oneself so that God has no pleasure in one. Those men
are chosen of God and well-pleasing to Him who diligently
hear the Gospel, believe in Christ, prove their
faith by good fruits, and suffer on that account what
they are called to suffer."

"This is the true sense, which can offend no one,
but makes men better, so that they think: Very well, if I
am to please God and be elected, I cannot afford to live
so as to have an evil conscience, sin against God's commandments,
and be unwilling to resist sin; but I must go
to church, and pray God for His Holy Spirit; nor must I
permit the Word to be taken out of my heart, but resist
the devil and his suggestions, and pray for protection,
patience, and help. This makes good Christians, whereas
those who think that God begrudges salvation to any
one either become reckless or secure, wicked people,
who live like brutes, thinking: It has already been
ordained whether I am to be saved or not; why, then,
should I stint myself anything? To think thus is wrong;
for you are commanded to hear God's Word and to
believe Christ to be your Savior, who has paid for your
sin.Remember this command and obey it. If you notice
that you are lacking faith, or that your faith is weak, pray
God to grant you His Holy Ghost, and do not doubt
that Christ is your Savior, and that if you believe in Him,
i.e., if you take comfort in Him, you shall by Him be
saved. Dear Lord Jesus Christ, grant this unto us all!
Amen." (E. 1, 204; St. L. 13, 199.)

#### 249. Statements Made by Luther in 1538 and 1545.

In his remarks of 1538 on Matt. 11:25-26, Luther
says: "Christ speaks especially against those who would
be wise and judge in religious matters, because they
have on their side the Law and human reason, which is
overwise, exalting itself against the true religion both by
teaching and by judging.Hence Christ here praises God
as doing right when He conceals His secrets from the
wise and prudent, because they want to be over and not
under God.Not as though He hid it in fact or desired to
hide it (for He commands it to be preached publicly
under the entire heaven and in all lands), but that He
has chosen that kind of preaching which the wise and
prudent abhor by nature, and which is hidden from
them through their own fault, since they do not want to
have it-as is written Is. 6, 9: 'See ye indeed, but perceive
not,' Lo, they see, i.e., they have the doctrine which is
preached both plainly and publicly. Still they do not
perceive, for they turn away from it and refuse to have
it. Thus they hide the truth from themselves by their
own blindness.And so, on the other hand,He reveals it
to the babes; for the babes receive it when it is revealed
to them. To them the truth is revealed since they wish
and desire it." (W. 7, 133.)

In a letter giving comfort concerning predestination,
dated August 8, 1545,Luther wrote:"My dear master
and friend N. has informed me that you are at times
in tribulation about God's eternal predestination, and
requested me to write you this short letter on that matter.
Now to be sure, this is a sore tribulation.But to overcome
it one must know that we are forbidden to understand
this or to speculate about it. For what God wants
to conceal we should be glad not to know. This is the
apple the eating of which brought death upon Adam
and Eve and upon all their children, when they wanted
to know what they were not to know. For as it is sin to
commit murder, to steal, or to curse, so it is also sin to
busy oneself searching such things. As an antidote to
this God has given us His Son, Jesus Christ. Of Him we
must daily think; in Him we must consider ourselves
(uns in ihm spiegeln). Then predestination will appear
lovely. For outside of Christ everything is only danger,
death, and the devil; in Him, however, there is nothing
but peace and joy. For if one forever torments himself
with predestination, all one gains is anguish of soul.
Hence flee and avoid such thoughts as the affliction of
the serpent of Paradise, and, instead, look upon Christ.
God preserve you!" (E. 56, 140; St. L. 10. 1748.)

#### 250. Statements Made by Luther in His Commentary on Genesis.

Luther's caeterum censeo, that we are neither to
deny nor to search the hidden God (who cannot be
apprehended in His bare majesty-qui in nuda sua
maiestate non potest apprehendi, E., Op. Lat. 2, 171), but
to adhere to the revelation He has given us in the
Gospel, is repeated again and again also in his
Commentary on Genesis, which was begun in 1536 and
completed in 1545. In the explanation of chap. 26, 9 we
read, in part:"I gladly take occasion from this passage to
discuss the question concerning doubt, concerning God
and God's will. For I hear that everywhere among the
nobles and magnates profane sayings are spread concerning
predestination or divine prescience. For they
say: 'If I am predestinated, I shall be saved, whether I
have done good or evil. If I am not predestinated, I shall
be damned, without any regard whatever to my works,'
Against these ungodly sayings I would gladly argue at
length if my ill health would permit. For if these sayings
are true, as they believe them to be, then the incarnation
of the Son of God, His suffering and resurrection, and
whatever He did for the salvation of the world, is entirely
abolished. What would the prophets and the entire
Holy Scriptures profit us? what the Sacraments? Let us
therefore abandon and crush all this," all these ungodly
sayings.

Luther proceeds:"These thoughts must be opposed
by the true and firm knowledge of Christ, even as I frequently
admonish that above all it is useful and necessary
that our knowledge of God be absolutely certain,
and being apprehended by firm assent of the mind,
cleave in us, as otherwise our faith will be in vain. For if
God does not stand by His promises, then our salvation
is done for, while on the contrary this is to be our consolation
that, although we change, we may nevertheless
flee to Him who is unchangeable. For this is what He
affirms of Himself, Mal. 3, 6: 'I am the Lord, I change
not,' and Rom. 11, 29: 'For the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance.' Accordingly, in the book De
Servo Arbitrio and elsewhere I have taught that we must
distinguish when we treat of the knowledge of God or,
rather, of His essence. For one must argue either concerning
the hidden or the revealed God. Concerning
God, in so far as He has not been revealed to us, there is
no faith, no knowledge, no cognition whatever. Here
one must apply the saying: What is above us does not
concern us (Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos). For such
thoughts as search for something higher, beyond or
without the revelation of God, are altogether diabolical;
and by them nothing else is achieved than that we
plunge ourselves into perdition, because they are occupied
with an unsearchable object, i.e., the unrevealed
God. Indeed, rather let God keep His decrees and mysteries
concealed from us, for there is no reason why we
should labor so much that they be disclosed to us.
Moses, too, asked God to show His face,or glory, to him.
But the Lord answered, Ex. 33, 23: 'Thou shalt see My
back parts; but My face shall not be seen. Posteriora mea
tibi ostendam, faciem autem meam videre non poteris.'
For this curiosity is original sin itself, by which we are
impelled to seek for a way to God by natural speculation.
But it is an enormous sin and a useless and vain
endeavor. For Christ says, John 6, 65; 14, 6: 'No man
cometh unto the Father but by Me.' Hence, when we
approach the non-revealed God, there is no faith, no
word, nor any knowledge, because He is an invisible
God whom you will not make visible."

With special reference to his book De Servo Arbitrio
Luther continues:"It was my desire to urge and set forth
these things, because after my death many will quote my
books and by them try to prove and confirm all manner
of errors and follies of their own. Now, among others I
have written that all things are absolute and necessary;
but at the same time (and very often at other times) I
added that we must look upon the revealed God, as we
sing in the Psalm: 'Er heisst Jesus Christ, der Herr
Zebaoth, und ist kein andrer Gott,' 'Jesus Christ it is, of
Sabaoth Lord, and there's none other God.'But they will
pass by all these passages, and pick out those only concerning
the hidden God. You, therefore, who are now
hearing me, remember that I have taught that we must
not inquire concerning the predestination of the hidden
God, but acquiesce in that which is revealed by the call
and the ministry of the Word. For there you can be certain
regarding your faith and salvation and say: I believe
in the Son of God who said: 'He that believeth on the
Son hath everlasting life,' John 3, 36. In Him therefore is
no damnation or wrath, but the good will of God the
Father. But these very things I have set forth also elsewhere
in my books, and now I transmit them orally, too,
viva voce; hence I am excused-ideo sum excusatus." (E.,
Op. Exeg. 6, 200. 292. 300; CONC. TRIGL. 897f.)

#### 251. Luther Never Retracted His Doctrine of Grace.

It has frequently been asserted that Luther in his
later years recalled his book De Servo Arbitrio, and
retracted, changed and essentially modified his original
doctrine of grace, or, at least silently, abandoned it and
relegated it to oblivion. Philippi says in his
Glaubenslehre (4, 1, 37): "In the beginning of the
Reformation [before {{< hiddenanchor 1525 >}}1525{{< /hiddenanchor >}} the doctrine of predestination
fell completely into the background. But when
Erasmus, in his endeavors to restore Semi-Pelagianism,
injected into the issue also the question of predestination,
Luther, in his De Servo Arbitrio with an overbold
defiance, did not shrink from drawing also the inferences
from his position. He, however, not only never
afterwards repeated this doctrine, but in reality taught
the very opposite in his unequivocal proclamation of
the universality of divine grace, of the all-sufficiency of
the merits of Christ, and of the universal operation of
the means of grace; and he even opposed that doctrine
[of De Servo Arbitrio] expressly as erroneous, and by his
corrections took back his earlier utterances on that subject."
Endorsing Philippi's view as "according well with
the facts in the case" J.W.Richard, who, too, charges the
early Luther with "absolute predestinarianism,"
remarks: "But this is certain: the older Luther became,
the more did he drop his earlier predestinarianism into
the background and the more did he lay stress on the
grace of God and on the means of grace,which offer salvation
to all men (in omnes, super omnes) without partiality,
and convey salvation to all who believe." (Conf.
Hist., 336.)

Time and again similar assertions have been repeated,
particularly by synergistic theologians. But they are
not supported by the facts. Luther, as his books abundantly
show was never a preacher of predestinarianism
(limited grace, limited redemption, etc.), but always a
messenger of God's universal grace in Christ, offered in
the means of grace to all poor and penitent sinners. In
his public preaching and teaching predestination never
predominated. Christ Crucified and His merits offered
in the Gospel always stood in the foreground. In De
Servo Arbitrio Luther truly says: "We, too, teach nothing
else than Christ Crucified." (St. L. 18, 1723; E. v. a. 7,
160.) Luther's sermons and books preached and published
before as well as after 1525 refute the idea that he
ever made predestination, let alone predestinarianism,
the center of his teaching and preaching. It is a fiction
that only very gradually Luther became a preacher of
universal grace and of the means of grace. In fact, he
himself as well as his entire reformation were products
of the preaching, not of predestinarianism, but of God's
grace and pardon offered to all in absolution and in the
means of grace. The bent of Luther's mind was not
speculative, but truly evangelical and Scriptural. Nor is
it probable that he would ever have entered upon the
question of predestination to such an extent as he did in
De Servo Arbitrio, if the provocation had not come from
without. It was the rationalistic, Semi-Pelagian attack of
Erasmus on the fundamental Christian truths concerning
man's inability in spiritual matters and his salvation
by grace alone which, in Luther's opinion, called fhe had
______________________________De Servo
Arbitrio. Wherever the occasion demanded it Luther
was ready to defend also the truth concerning God's
majesty and supremacy, but he always was and
remained a preacher of the universal mercy of God as
revealed in Christ Crucified.

Nor is there any solid foundation whatever for the
assertion that Luther later on retracted his book against
Erasmus or abandoned its doctrine,-a fact at present
generally admitted also by disinterested historians.
(Frank 1, 129. 135. 125.) In his criticism of the Book of
Confutation, dated March 7, 1559 Landgrave Philip of
Hesse declared: "As to free will,we a long time ago have
read the writings of Luther and Erasmus of Rotterdam
as well as their respective replies; and, although in the
beginning they were far apart, Luther some years later
saw the disposition of the common people and gave a
better explanation (und sich besser erklaeret); and we
believe, if a synod were held and one would hear the
other, they would come to a brotherly agreement in this
article." (C. R. 9, 760.) But Flacius immediately declared
that this assertion was false, as appeared from Luther's
Commentary on Genesis and his letter to the Elector
concerning the Regensburg Interim. (Preger 2, 82.)
Schaff writes: "The Philippist [Christopher] Lasius first
asserted, 1568 that Luther had recalled his book De
Servo Arbitrio; but this was indignantly characterized by
Flacius and Westphal as a wretched lie and an insult to
the evangelical church. The fact is that Luther emphatically
reaffirmed this book, in a letter to Capito [July {{< hiddenanchor 9 >}}9{{< /hiddenanchor >}},
1637, as one of his very best." (Creeds 1, 303.) In his letter
to Capito, Luther says: "Nullum enim agnosco meum
iustum librum nisi forte 'De Servo Arbitrio' et
'Catechismum,'" thus endorsing De Servo Arbitrio in the
same manner as his Catechism. (Enders 11, 247.) Before
this Luther had said at his table: "Erasmus has written
against me in his booklet Hyperaspistes, in which he
endeavors to defend his book On Free Will, against
which I wrote my book On the Enslaved Will, which as
yet he has not refuted, and will never in eternity be able
to refute. This I know for certain, and I defy and challenge
the devil together with all his minions to refute it.
For I am certain that it is the immutable truth of God."
(St. L. 20, 1081.) Despite numerous endeavors, down to
the present day, not a shred of convincing evidence has
been produced showing that Luther ever wavered in this
position, or changed his doctrine of grace. Luther's
extensive reference to De Servo Arbitrio in his
Commentary on Genesis, from which we freely quoted
above, has frequently been interpreted as a quasi-retraction.
But according to the Formula of Concord these
expositions of Luther's merely "repeat and explain" his
former position. They certainly do not offer any corrections
of his former fundamental views. Luther does not
speak of any errors of his own, but of errors of others
which they would endeavor to corroborate by quoting
from his books-"post meam mortem multi meos libros
proferrent in medium et inde omnis generis errores et
deliria sua confirmabunt."Moreover, he declares that he
is innocent if some should misuse his statements concerning
necessity and the hidden God, because he had
expressly added that we must not search the hidden
majesty of God, but look upon the revealed God to
judge of His disposition toward us-"addidi, quod
aspiciendus sit Deus revelatus ... Ideo sum excusatus."
(CONC. TRIGL., 898.) Luther's entire theological activity,
before as well as after 1525, was an application of the
principle stressed also in De Servo Arbitrio, viz., that we
must neither deny nor investigate or be concerned
about the hidden God, but study God as He has
revealed Himself in the Gospel and firmly rely on His
gracious promises in the means of grace.

#### 252. Luther's Doctrine Approved by Formula of Concord.

Flacius, who himself did not deny the universality
of grace, declared at the colloquy in Weimar, 1560, that,
when taken in their context, Luther's statements in De
Servo Arbitrio contained no inapt expressions (nihil
incommodi). He added: "I do not want to be the
reformer of Luther, but let us leave the judgment and
discussion concerning this book to the Church of
sound doctrine.Nolo reformator esse Lutheri, sed iudicium
et discussionem istius libri permittamus sanae ecclesiae."
(Planck 4, 704, Frank 4, 255.) In Article II of the
Formula of Concord the Church passed on Luther's
book on the bondage of the will together with his declarations
in his Commentary on Genesis. In referring to
this matter the Formula gives utterance to the following
thoughts: 1. that in De Servo Arbitrio Luther "elucidated
and supported this position [on free will, occupied also
by the Formula of Corcord] well and thoroughly, egregie
et solide"; 2. that "afterwards he repeated and explained
it in his glorious exposition of the Book of Genesis,
especially of chapter 26;" 3. that in this exposition also
"his meaning and understanding of some other peculiar
disputations, introduced incidentally by Erasmus, as
of absolute necessity, etc., have been secured by him in
the best and most careful way against all misunderstanding
and perversion;" 4. that the Formula of
Concord "appeals and refers others" to these deliverances
of Luther. (CONC. TRIGL. 896, 44.)

The Formula of Concord, therefore, endorsed
Luther's De Servo Arbitrio without expressing any strictures
or reservations whatever, and, particularly in
Articles I, II and XI, also embodied its essential thoughts
though not all of its phrases statements, and arguments.
The said articles contain a guarded reproduction and
affirmation of Luther's doctrine of grace, according to
which God alone is the cause of man's salvation while
man alone is the cause of his damnation. In particular
they reaffirm Luther's teaching concerning man's
depravity and the inability of his will to cooperate in
conversion; the divine monergism in man's salvation;
the universality of grace and of the efficaciousness of the
means of grace; man's responsibility for the rejection of
grace and for his damnation; God's unsearchable judgments
and mysterious ways; the mystery why some are
lost while others are saved, though all are equally guilty
and equally loved by God; the solution of this problem
in the light of glory where it will be made apparent that
there never were contradictory wills in God. In its doctrine
of predestination as well as of free will, therefore,
the Formula of Concord is not a compromise between
synergism and monergism, but signifies a victory of
Luther over the later Melanchthon.

#### 253.Attitude of Apology of the Book of Concord.

The attitude of the Formula of Concordwith respect
to Luther's De Servo Arbitrio was shared by contemporary
Lutheran theologians. They expressed objections
neither to the book itself nor to its public endorsement
by the Formula of Concord. In 1569 the theologians of
Ducal Saxony publicly declared their adherence to the
doctrine "set forth most luminously and skilfully
(summa luce et dexteritate traditum)" in De Servo
Arbitrio, the Commentary on Genesis, and other books
of Luther. (Schluesselburg 6, 133.) That the authors of
the Formula of Concord were fully conscious of their
agreement with Luther's De Servo Arbitrio and his
Commentary on Genesis appears also from the Apology
of the Book of Concord, composed 1582 by Kirchner
Selneccer, and Chemnitz. Instead of charging Luther
with errors, these theologians, who were prominent in
the drafting of the Formula or Concord, endorse and
defend his position, viz., that we must neither deny nor
investigate the hidden God, but search the Gospel for an
answer to the question how God is disposed toward us.

In this Apology the opening paragraph of the section
defending Article XI of the Formula of Concord
against the Neustadt theologians reads as follows: "In
their antilog [antilogia - attack on Article XI of the
Formula of Concord] regarding God's eternal election
and predestination they merely endeavor to persuade
the people that in this article the doctrine of the
Christian Book of Concord [Formula of Concord] conflicts
with the teaching of Doctor Luther and his book
De Servo Arbitrio, while otherwise we ourselves are
accustomed to appeal to Luther's writings.They accordingly
charge the Book of Concord with condemning
Luther, who in the book called Servum Arbitrium maintained
the proposition that it was not superfluous but
highly necessary and useful for a Christian to know
whether God's foreknowledge (Versehung) is certain or
uncertain, changeable, etc. Now, praise the Lord, these
words of Dr. Luther are not unknown to us, but,
besides, we also well know how Dr. Luther in his last
explanation of the 26th chapter of the First Book of
Moses explains and guards these words of his." (Fol.
204a.) After quoting the passages from Luther's Genesis,
which we cited above (p. 223f.), the Apology continues:
"With this explanation of Luther we let the matter rest.
If our opponents [the Neustadt theologians] wish to
brood over it any further and in their investigating and
disputing dive into the abyss or unfathomable depth of
this mystery, they may do so for themselves [at their
own risk] and suffer the consequences of such an
attempt.As for us we are content to adhere to God in so
far as He has revealed Himself in His Word, and lead
and direct Christianity thereto, reserving the rest for the
life to come." (405a.)

#### 254. Agreement of Apology with Formula of Concord and Luther.

Doctrinally also, the Apology of the Book of Concord
is in agreement with both Luther and the Formula of
Concord. This appears from the following excerpts:
"Nor does the Christian Book of Concord [Formula of
Concord] deny that there is a reprobation in God or
that God rejects some; hence also it does not oppose
Luther's statement when he writes in De Servo Arbitrio
against Erasmus that it is the highest degree of faith to
believe that God, who saves so few, is nevertheless most
merciful; but it does not intend to ascribe to God the
efficient cause of such reprobation or damnation as the
doctrine of our opponents teaches; it rather holds that,
when this question is discussed all men should put their
finger on their lips and first say with the Apostle Paul,
Rom. 11, 20: 'Propter incredulitatem defracti sunt-
Because of unbelief they were broken off,' and Rom. 6,
23: 'For the wages of sin is death.' In the second place:
When the question is asked why God the Lord does not
through His Holy Spirit convert, and bestow faith upon,
all men, etc. (which He is certainly able to do-das er
doch wohl koennte), that we furthermore say with the
Apostle [Rom. 11, {{< hiddenanchor 33 >}}33{{< /hiddenanchor >}}: 'Quam incomprehensibilia sunt
iudicia eius et impervestigabiles viae eius-How
unsearchable are His judgments and His ways past finding
out,' but not in any way ascribe to the Lord God
Himself the willing and efficient cause of the reprobation
and damnation of the impenitent."

"But when they, pressing us, declare, 'Since you
admit the election of the elect, you must also admit the
other thing, viz., that in God Himself there is from eternity
a cause of reprobation, also apart from sin,' etc.,
then we declare that we are not at all minded to make
God the author [Ursacher] of reprobation (the cause of
which properly lies not in God, but in sin), nor to
ascribe to Him the efficient cause of the damnation of
the ungodly, but intend to adhere to the word of the
Prophet Hosea, chapter 13, where God Himself says: 'O
Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in Me is thy help.'
Nor do we intend to search our dear God in so far as He
is hidden and has not revealed Himself.For it is too high
for us anyway, and we cannot comprehend it. And the
more we occupy ourselves with this matter, the farther
we depart from our dear God, and the more we doubt
His gracious will toward us." (206.)

The Apology continues: "Likewise the Book of
Concord [Formula of Concord] does not deny that God
does not work in all men in the same manner. For at all
times there are many whom He has not called through
the public ministry.However, our opponents shall nevermore
persuade us to infer with them that God is an
efficient [wirkliche] cause of the reprobation of such
people, and that He decreed absolutely from His mere
counsel [fuer sich aus blossem Rat] to reject and cast
them away eternally, even irrespective of their sin [auch
ausserhalb der Suende]. For when we arrive at this abyss
of the mysteries of God, it is sufficient to say with the
Apostle Rom. 11:'His judgments are unsearchable,' and
1 Cor. 15, 57:'But thanks be to God, which giveth us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.'Whatever goes
beyond this our Savior Christ Himself will reveal to us
in eternal life."

"Nor is there any cause for the cry that the Book of
Concord did not distinguish between malum culpae, i.e.,
sin which God neither wills, nor approves, nor works,
and malum poenae, or the punishments which He wills
and works.For there [in Article XI] the purpose was not
to discuss all questions which occur and might be treated
in this matter concerning God's eternal election, but
merely to give a summary statement of the chief points
of this article; and elsewhere this distinction is clearly
explained by our theologians. Nor is there any one
among us who approves of this blasphemy, that God
wills sin, is pleased with it, and works it; moreover, we
reject such speech as a blasphemy against God Himself.
Besides, it is plainly stated, p. 318 [edition of 1580;
CONC. TRIGL. 1065, {{< hiddenanchor 6 >}}6{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, that God does not will evil acts
and works, from which it is apparent that the Book
[Formula] of Concord does not at all teach that God is
the author of malum culpae or of sins in the same manner
as He executes and works the punishments of sins."
(206 b.)

#### 255.Apology on Universalis Gratia Seria et Efficax.

Emphasizing the universality and seriousness of
God's grace and the possibility of conversion and salvation
even for those who are finally damned, the Apology
proceeds: "And why should we not also reject [the
proposition]: 'The reprobate cannot be converted and
saved,' since it is undoubtedly true that, with respect to
those who are finally rejected and damned, we are
unable to judge with certainty who they are, and there
is hope for the conversion of all men as long as they are
still alive? For the malefactor, Luke 23, was converted to
God at his last end; concerning whom, according to the
judgment of reason everybody might have said that he
was one of the reprobates. The passage John 12, 39:
'Therefore they could not believe,' etc., does not properly
treat of eternal reprobation, nor does it say with so
many words that no reprobate can be converted and
saved ... It is therefore the meaning neither of the
prophet [Is. 6, 9. {{< hiddenanchor 10 >}}10{{< /hiddenanchor >}} nor of the evangelist [John 12, {{< hiddenanchor 39 >}}39{{< /hiddenanchor >}}
that God, irrespective of the sins and wickedness of such
people, solely from His mere counsel, purpose, and will,
ordains them to damnation so that they cannot be
saved.Moreover, the meaning and correct understanding
of this passage is, that in the obstinate and impenitent
God punishes sin with sins, and day by day permits
them to become more blind, but not that He has pleasure
in their sin and wickedness, effectually works in
them blindness and obstinacy, or that He, solely from
His purpose and mere counsel, irrespective also of sins,
has foreordained them to damnation so that they cannot
convert themselves and be saved. In all such and
similar passages, therefore, we shall and must be sedulously
on our guard, lest we spin therefrom this blasphemy,
that out of His free purpose and counsel, irrespective
also of sin, God has decreed to reject eternally
these or others ... " (207.)

With respect to the seriousness of universal grace
we furthermore read: "They [the Neustadt theologians]
say that in His Word God declares what He approves,
and earnestly demands of, all men, but not what He
wishes to work and effect in all of them.For, they say,He
reveals His secret counsel in no other way than by working
in man, viz., through conversion or final hardening
of those who are either converted or hardened and
damned ...With regard to this we give the following correct
answer, viz.: that we are not minded in the least to
carry on a dispute or discussion with our opponents
concerning God and His secret counsel, purpose, or will
in so far as He has not in His Word revealed Himself
and His counsel. The reason is the one quoted above
from the words of Luther himself, viz., that concerning
God, so far as He has not been revealed [to us], or has
not made Himself known in His Word, there is neither
faith nor knowledge, and one cannot know anything of
Him, etc., which also in itself is true.Why, then, should
we, together with our opponents dive into the abyss of
the incomprehensible judgments of God and presumptuously
assert with them that from His mere counsel,
purpose, and will, irrespective also of sin, God has
ordained some to damnation who cannot be converted,
moreover, whom He, according to His secret purpose,
does not want to be converted, despite the fact that
through the office of the ministry He declares Himself
friendly towards them and offers them His grace and
mercy? My dear friend, where is it written in the Word
of God that it is not the will of God that all should be
saved, but that, irrespective of their sin,He has ordained
some to damnation only from His mere counsel, purpose,
and will, so that they cannot be saved? Never in all
eternity, try as they may,will they prove this proposition
from God's revealed Word. For nowhere do the Holy
Scriptures speak thus.Yet from sheer foolhardiness they
dare employ, contrary to Scripture, such blasphemous
doctrine and speech and spread it in all Christendom."
(108 b.)

#### 256. Apology on God's Mysterious Judgments and Ways.

Concerning the mysterious judgments and ways of
God the Apology says:"At the same time we do not deny
that God does not work alike in all men, enlightening
all,-for neither does He give His Word to all,-and
that nevertheless He is and remains both just and merciful,
and that nobody can justly accuse Him of any
unfaithfulness, envy, or tyranny, although He does not,
as said, give His Word to all and enlighten them. But we
add that, when arriving at this mystery, one should put
his finger on his lips and not dispute or brood over it
[gruebeln-from the facts conceded infer doctrines
subversive of God's universal serious grace], but say
with the apostle:'How unsearchable are His judgments,
and His ways past finding out!' Much less should one
rashly say, as our opponents do, that ofHis free will, and
irrespective of sin, God has ordained that some should
be damned. For as to what God holds and has decreed
in His secret, hidden counsel, nothing certain can be
said. Nor should one discuss this deeply hidden mystery,
but reserve it for yonder life,and meanwhile adhere
to the revealed Word of God by which we are called to
repentance, and by which salvation is faithfully offered
us. And this Word, or revealed will, of God concerning
the giving rest to all those that labor and are heavy
laden, is certain, infallible, unwavering, and not at all
opposed to the secret counsel of God,with which alone
our opponents are occupied. Accordingly nothing that
conflicts with the will revealed in the Word of God
should be inferred from it, even as God Himself in His
Word has not directed us to it. Because of the fact, therefore,
that not all accept this call,we must not declare that
from His free purpose and will, without regard to sin,
God in His secret counsel, has ordained those who do
not repent to damnation, so that they cannot be converted
and saved (for this has not been revealed to us in
the Word), but adhere to this, that God's judgments in
these cases are unsearchable and incomprehensible."

"It is impossible that the doctrine of the opponents
concerning this article should not produce in the hearers
either despair or Epicurean security, when in this
doctrine it is taught that God, from His mere counsel
and purpose and irrespective of sin, has ordained some
to damnation so that they cannot be converted. For as
soon as a heart hears this, it cannot but despair of its salvation,
or fall into these Epicurean thoughts: If you are
among the reprobate whom, from His free purpose and
without regard to sin, God has ordained to damnation,
then you cannot be saved, do what you will. But if you
are among those who shall be saved, then you cannot
fail; do what you will, you must nevertheless be saved,
etc.We do not in the least intend to join our opponents
in giving occasion for such things. God also shall protect
us from it." (209.)

Again:"They [the opponents] also say that we stress
the universal promises of grace, but fail to add that these
belong and pertain to believers. But herein they wrong
us. For we urge both, viz., that the promises of grace are
universal, and that, nevertheless, only believers, who
labor and are heavy laden,Matt. 11, become partakers of
them. But their [our opponents'] object is to have us
join them in saying that some are ordained to damnation
from the free purpose of God, also without regard
to sin,whom He does not want to be saved, even though
He calls them through the Word and offers His grace
and salvation to them,-which, however,we shall never
do. For our heart is filled with horror against such a
Stoic and Manichean doctrine." (209 b.)

