---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XXII.Article XII of the Formula of Concord - Of Other Heretics and Sects.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 22
---

#### 257. Purpose of Article XII.

The purpose of the first eleven articles of the
Formula of Concord was not only to establish peace
within the Lutheran Church and to ward off future controversies,
but also to meet the ridicule and obloquy of
the Papists and to brand before the whole world as slander,
pure and simple, their assertions that the Lutherans
were hopelessly disagreed and had abandoned the
Augsburg Confession, and that the Reformation was
bound to end in utter confusion and dissolution. The
Formula of Concord was to leave no doubt regarding the
fact that the Lutheran Church offers a united front in
every direction: against the Romanists, the Calvinists,
the errorists that had arisen in their own midst, and selfevidently
also against the sects and fanatics, old and
modern, with whom the Romanists slanderously identified
them.

Summarizing the errors which Lutherans repudiate,
the Formula of Concord declares: "First, we reject
and condemn all heresies and errors which were rejected
and condemned in the primitive, ancient, orthodox
Church, upon the true, firm ground of the holy divine
Scriptures. Secondly, we reject and condemn all sects
and heresies which are rejected in the writings, just
mentioned, of the comprehensive summary of the confession
of our churches [the Lutheran symbols, preceding
the Formula of Concord]. Thirdly, we reject also all
those errors which caused dissension within the
Lutheran Church, and which are dealt with and refuted
in the first eleven articles of the Formula of Concord."
(857, 17ff.) Among the errors rejected in the Augsburg
Confession and the subsequent Lutheran symbols were
those also of the Anabaptists,Antitrinitarians, and others.
(CONC. TRIGL. 42, 6; 44, 4; 46, 3; 48, 7; 50, 3. 4; 138,
66; 244, 52; 310, 13; 356, 43; 436, 49; 744, 55; 746, 58.)
And this is the class of errorists which Article XII of the
Formula of Concord makes it a special point to characterize
summarily and reject by name. Before this the
Book of Confutation, composed 1559 by the theologians
of Duke John Frederick, had enumerated and rejected
the doctrines of such errorists as Servetus,
Schwenckfeld, and the Anabaptists.

From the very beginning of the Reformation, and
especially at Augsburg, 1530, Eck and other Romanists
had either identified the Lutherans with the Anabaptists
and other sects, or had, at least, held them responsible
for their origin and growth. Both charges are denied by
the Formula ofConcord.For here we read:"However, lest
there be silently ascribed to us the condemned errors of
the above enumerated factions and sects (which, as is
the nature of such spirits, for the most part, secretly stole
in at localities, and especially at a time when no place or
room was given to the pure word of the holy Gospel,
but all its sincere teachers and confessors were persecuted,
and the deep darkness of the Papacy still prevailed
and poor simple men who could not help but feel the
manifest idolatry and false faith of the Papacy, in their
simplicity, alas! embraced whatever was called Gospel,
and was not papistic), we could not forbear testifying
also against them publicly, before all Christendom, that
we have neither part nor fellowship with their errors, be
they many or few, but reject and condemn them, one
and all, as wrong and heretical, and contrary to the
Scriptures of the prophets and apostles, and to our
Christian Augsburg Confession, well grounded in God's
Word." (1097, 7f.)

#### 258. The Anabaptists.

The Anabaptistic movement originated in Zurich.
Their leaders were Conrad Grebel, Felix Manz, and the
monk George of Chur (also called Blaurock, Bluecoat),
who was the first to introduce anabaptism. In rapid succession
Anabaptistic congregations sprang up in
Swabia, Tyrol, Austria, Moravia, etc. Because of their
attitude toward the civil government the Anabaptists
were regarded as rebels and treated accordingly.As early
as January, 1527, some of them were executed in Zurich.
Persecution increased after the council held by
Anabaptists in the autumn of 1527 at Augsburg, which
then harbored a congregation of more than 1,100
"Apostolic Brethren," as the Anabaptists there called
themselves. In Germany the imperial mandate of
September 23, 1529, authorized the governments to
punish Anabaptists, men and women of every age, by
fire or sword "without previous inquisition by spiritual
judges." They suffered most in Catholic territories. By
1531 about 1,000 (according to Sebastian Franck 2,000)
had been executed in Tyrol and Goerz.

The most prominent of the early Anabaptistic leaders
and protagonists were Hubmaier, Denk, Dachser,
and Hans Hutt. Besides these we mention: Ludwig
Haetzer, published a translation of the prophets from
the Hebrew, 1527, for which he was praised by Luther,
was executed as adulterer February 4, 1529, at
Constance; Eitelhans Langenmantel, a former soldier
and son of the Augsburg burgomaster, expelled from
the city October 14, 1527, impassionate in his writings
against the "old and new Papists," i.e., Luther and others
who adhered to the real presence of Christ in the Lord's
Supper, decapitated May 12, 1528, at Weissenburg;
Christian Entfelder, 1527 leader of the Brethren at
Eisenschuetz Moravia, and later on counselor of Duke
Albrecht of Prussia; Hans Schlaffer, a former priest,
active as Anabaptistic preacher and author, executed
1528; Joerg Haug, pastor in Bibra;Wolfgang Vogel, pastor
near Nuernberg, executed 1527; Siegmund
Salminger, imprisoned 1527 in Augsburg; Leonard
Schiemer, former Franciscan, bishop of the Brethren in
Austria, an Antitrinitarian, executed 1528; Ulrich
Hugwald, professor in Basel; Melchior Rinck, pastor in
Hesse; Pilgram Marbeck; Jacob Buenderlin; Jacob
Kautz, preacher and author in Worms; Clemens Ziegler;
Peter Riedemann, an Anabaptistic author and preacher,
who was frequently imprisoned and died 1556;
Melchior Hofmann, an Anabaptistic lay-preacher and
prolific author, who died in prison at Strassburg, 1543.
(Tschackert, 148ff.; Schlottenloher, Philipp Ulhart, ein
Augsburger Winkeldrucker und Helfershelfer der
"Schwaermer" und "Wiedertaeufer," 1523-1529, p.
59ff.)

The various errors of the Anabaptists are enumerated
in the Twelfth Article of the Formula of Concord.
The Epitome remarks: "The Anabaptists are divided
among themselves into many factions, as one contends
for more, another for less errors; however they all in
common propound such doctrine as is to be tolerated
or allowed neither in the church, nor in the commonwealth
and secular government, nor in domestic life."
(839, 2.) Urbanus Regius said in his book Against the
New Baptistic Order: "Not all [of the Anabaptists] know
of all of these errors [enumerated in his book]; it is
therefore not our intention to do an injustice to any
one; we mean such public deceivers in the Baptistic
Order as John Denk and Balthasar Friedberger,"
Hubmaier. (Schlottenloher, 80.)

While some of the Anabaptists, as Hubmaier, were
more conservative, others (Denk, Schiemer) went so far
as to deny even the doctrine of the Trinity. They all were
agreed, however, in their opposition to infant baptism,
and to the Lutheran doctrines of justification, of the
means of grace, of the Sacraments, etc. What their
preachers stressed was not faith in the atonement made
by Christ, but medieval mysticism, sensation-faith
(Gefuehlsglaube), and the law of love as exemplified by
Christ. Tschackert quotes from one of their sermons:
"Whoever follows the voice which constantly speaks in
his heart always finds in himself the true testimony to
sin no more, and an admonition to resist the evil."
(153.) In his introduction to a publication of hymns of
Breuning, Salminger said: "Whoever speaks in truth to
what his own heart testifies will be received by God."
Schlottenloher remarks: "It was medieval mysticism
from which they [the Anabaptists] derived their consuming
desire for the complete union of the soul with
God and the Spirit." (83.)

#### 259. Balthasar Hubmaier.

Hubmaier (Hubmoer, Friedberger, Pacimontanus)
was born at Friedberg, near Augsburg, and studied
under Eck. In 1512 he became Doctor and professor of
theology at Ingolstadt; 1516 preacher in Regensburg;
1522 pastor in Waldshut on the Rhine. Before he came
to Waldshut, he had read the books of Luther.He joined
Zwingli in his opposition to Romanism. In January,
1525, however, he wrote to Oecolampadius that now
"he proclaimed publicly what before he had kept to
himself," referring in particular to his views on infant
baptism. On Easter Day of the same year he was rebaptized
together with 60 other persons, after which he
continued to baptize more than 300. In July of 1525 he
published his book Concerning Christian Baptism of
Believers, which was directed against Zwingli, whose
name, however, was not mentioned.At Zurich,whither
he had fled from Waldshut after the defeat of the peasants
in their rebellion of 1525, he was compelled to hold
a public disputation with Zwingli on infant baptism.
This led to his imprisonment from which he was
released only after a public recantation, 1526. He
escaped to Nicolsburg,Moravia, where, under the protection
of a powerful nobleman, he developed a feverish
activity and rebaptized about 12,000 persons.When the
persecutions of the Anabaptists began, Hubmaier was
arrested, and after sulphur and powder had been well
rubbed into his long beard, he was burned at the stake
in Vienna. March 10, 1528. Three days after, his wife,
with a stone about her neck, was thrust from the bridge
into the Danube.

Hubmaier denounced infant baptism as "an abominable
idolatry." He taught:: Children are incapable of
making the public confession required by Baptism;
there is no Scriptural reason for infant baptism; it robs
us of the true baptism, since people believe that children
are baptized while in reality they are nothing less than
baptized.He says:"Since the alleged infant baptism is no
baptism, those who now receive water-baptism according
to the institution of Christ cannot be charged with
anabaptism."

Concerning the Lord's Supper, Hubmaier taught:
"Here it is apparent that the bread is not the body of
Christ, but only a reminder of it. Likewise the wine is
not the blood of Christ, but also a mere memorial that
He has shed and given His blood to wash all believers
from their sins." "In the Lord's Supper the body and
blood of Christ are received spiritually and by faith
only." In the Supper of Christ "bread is bread and wine
is wine and not Christ. For He has ascended to heaven
and sits at the right hand of God,His Father."

Hubmaier did not regard the Word as a means of
grace nor Baptism and the Lord's Supper as gracious
acts of God, but as mere works of man."In believers,"he
says, "God works both to will and to do, by the inward
anointing of His Holy Spirit."Concerning church discipline
he taught:Where the Christian ban is not established
and used according to the command of Christ,
there sin, shame, and vice control everything. A person
who is expelled must be denied all communion until he
repents. In connection with his deliverances on the ban,
Hubmaier, after the fashion of the Papists, made the
Gospel of Christian liberty as preached by Luther
responsible for the carnal way in which many abused it.
The socialistic trend of Anabaptism, however, was not
developed by Hubmaier. (Tschackert 132. 172. 234.)

#### 260. Dachser and Hutt.

Jacob Dachser was one of the most zealous members
and leaders of the large Anabaptistic congregation
in Augsburg, where he was also imprisoned, 1527. He,
not Langenmantel, is the author of the "Offenbarung
von den wahrhaftigen Wiedertaeufern. Revelation of the
True Anabaptists," secretly published by the
Anabaptistic printer Philip Ulhart in Augsburg and
accepted as a sort of confession by the council held by
the Anabaptists in the fall of 1527 at Augsburg. The
book of Urban Regius: "Wider den neuen Tauforden
notwendige Warnung an alle Christenglaeubigen-
Against the new Baptistic Order, a Necessary Warning
to All Christians," was directed against Dachser's
Revelation. In 1529 Dachser published his Form and
Order of Spiritual Songs, the first hymn-book of the
Anabaptists, containing hymns of Luther, Speratus,
Muenzer,Hutt, Pollio, and Dachser.

In his Revelation Dachser said: "The entire world is
against each other; we don't know any more where the
truth is.While all are convinced that the Pope has erred
and deceived us, the new preachers, by reviling and
maligning each other, betray that they, too, are not sent
by God.""In their pulpits the false teachers [Lutherans,
etc.] themselves confess that the longer they preach, the
less good is done. But since they do not forsake a place
where they see no fruits of their doctrine, they thereby
reveal that they are not sent by God.""God draws us to
Himself through the power which is in us, and warns us
against wickedness and through the Teacher Christ,
who in His Word has taught us the will of God.""Christ
sent His disciples to preach the Gospel to all creatures
and to baptize such as believe. And such as obey this
command are called ¡¥Anabaptists'!" "By our evil will
original purity has been defiled; from this uncleanness
we must purge our heart. Who does not find this
uncleanness in himself, neither without nor within, is a
true child of God, obedient to the Word of God.Who,
in accordance with the command of Christ, preaches
and baptizes such as believe, is not an Anabaptist, but a
cobaptist [Mittaeufer] of Christ and the Apostles." "All
such as preach, teach, and baptize otherwise than Christ
commanded, are the real Anabaptists [opponents of
Baptism], acting contrary to the Son of God, by first
baptizing, instead of first teaching and awaiting faith, as
Christ commanded.""We need but strive with Christ to
do the will of the Father then we receive from God
through the Holy Ghost the power to fulfil the divine
command." (Schlottenloher, 72ff.)

Hans Hutt (Hut), a restless bookbinder in
Franconia, attended the Anabaptistic council in
Augsburg, where he was opposed by Regius and incarcerated.
He died 1527 in an attempt to escape from
prison. As a punishment his body was burned. Hutt
must not be confounded with Jacob Huter or Hueter, an
Anabaptist in Tyrol. The followers of Hans Hutt in the
city of Steyr developed the socialistic tendencies of
Anabaptism. They taught : Private ownership is sinful;
all things are to be held in common; Judgment Day is
imminent; then the Anabaptists will reign with Christ
on earth. Some also taught that finally the devil and all
the damned would be saved; others held that there is
neither a devil nor a hell, because Christ had destroyed
them. (Tschackert 134ff. 141. 153.) Article XVII of the
Augsburg Confession condemns "the Anabaptists, who
think that there will be an end to the punishments of
condemned men and devils ...; also others,who are now
spreading certain Jewish opinions, that before the resurrection
of the dead the godly shall take possession of the
kingdom of the world, the ungodly being everywhere
suppressed." (CONC. TRIGL., 51, 4.)

#### 261. John Denk.

Denk, who was called the "Archbaptist," the
"Bishop," "Pope," and "Apollo" of the Anabaptists, was
born in Bavaria and trained in Basel. In 1523 he became
Rector of St. Sebald in Nuernberg where he was
opposed by Osiander.Banished in the following year,he
escaped to St. GalIen. Expelled again, he fled to
Augsburg. Here he was rebaptized by immersion and
became an active member of the Anabaptistic
"Apostolic Brethren," who at that time numbered about
1,100 persons. Denk was the leader of the council held
by the Anabaptists in 1527 in Augsburg. Expelled from
the city, Denk died during his flight, 1527, at Basel.His
"Retraction, Widerruf" (a title probably chosen by the
printer), published 1527 after his death, does not contain
a retraction, but a summary of his teaching.
(Schlottenloher, 84.) The mystic mind of Denk runs a
good deal in the channels of the author of the "German
Theology, Deutsche Theologie," and of his pantheistic
contemporary, Sebastian Franck.

Denk taught: God is one, and the source of unity.
To return from all divisions to this unity must be our
constant aim. The only way is entire surrender to God
and submission in tranquillity.He says:"Nothing is necessary
for this salvation [reunion with God] but to obey
Him who is in us, and to be tranquil and wait for Him
in the true real Sabbath and tranquillity, losing ourselves
and all that is ours, so that God may both work and suffer
in us. He who is in us is ready every hour and
moment to follow, if we are but willing. His hour is
always, but ours is not. He calls and stretches forth His
arms the entire day, always ready; nobody answers Him,
nobody admits Him or suffers Him to enter. Do but
seek the Lord, then you will find Him; yea,He is already
seeking you; only suffer yourselves to be found. Indeed
He has already found you, and even now is knocking.
Do but open unto Him and let Him in.Apprehend and
know the Lord, even as you are apprehended and
known of Him."

Denk held that the source of religious and moral
knowledge is not the Scriptures, but the voice of God in
the heart of man, or Christ Himself, who speaks and
writes the divine Law into the hearts of those who are
His. [Before Denk, Thomas Muenzer had said: "Was
Bibel!! Bibel, Bubel, Babel!"] Whoever has this divine
Law in his heart lacks nothing that is needed to fulfil the
will of God. According to Denk a man may be saved
without the preaching of the Word, without the
Scriptures, and without any knowledge of the historical
Christ and His work. Nor can the Scriptures be understood
without heeding the revelation of God in our
own bosom. The Scriptures must indeed be regarded as
higher than "all human treasures, but not as high as
God's Word" [in our own bosom]. Baptism is a mere
outward sign that one has joined the number of believers;
hence it can be administered to such only as are
conscious of their faith. Ceremonies in themselves are
not sin, says Denk, "but whoever imagines to obtain
grace through them, either by Baptism or by the
Breaking of Bread, is given to superstition." (Tschackert,
143;Meusel,Handl. 2, 142.)

#### 262. The Schwenckfeldians.

Caspar Schwenckfeldt, of Ossig in Liegnitz a
descendent of a noble family in Silesia, was born 1490
and studied in Cologne. In 1524 he helped to introduce
the Reformation in Liegnitz. He was twice in
Wittenberg; 1522, when he met Carlstadt and Thomas
Muenzer and 1525, when he visited Luther.He endeavored
to interest Luther in the formation of conventicles,
and particularly in his mystical theory concerning the
Lord's Supper, which he considered the correct middle
ground on which Lutherans and Zwinglians might
compromise. But Luther had no confidence in the
enthusiast, whom he characterized as a "mad fool,"
"possessed by the devil." He said: "In Silesia
Schwenckfeldt has kindled a fire which as yet has not
been quenched and will burn on him eternally."

Because of the troubles and dissensions created in
Liegnitz, Schwenckfeldt, in 1529, was compelled to
leave. Having removed to Strassburg he was zealous in
propagating his enthusiasm in Southern Germany by
establishing conventicles of "Lovers of the Glory of
Christ," as the adherents of Schwenckfeldt called themselves.
At a colloquy in Tuebingen, 1535, he promised
not to disquiet the Church. In 1539 he published his
Summary of Several Arguments that Christ according to
His Humanity Is To-day No Creature, but Entirely Our
God and Lord. He called it the doctrine of the
"Deification of the Flesh of Christ."When this teaching
was rejected as Eutychianism, Schwenckfeldt published
his Large Confession, 1540. At the convention of
Smalcald, also 1540, his views were condemned and his
books prohibited and burned. Compelled to leave
Strassburg, he spent the remainder of his life in
Augsburg, in Speier and in Ulm (where he died,
December 10 1561) . Schwenckfeldt exchanged controversial
writings with many contemporary theologians,
whom he kept in constant excitement. In Liegnitz he
was supported by the ministers Valentin Krautwald,
Fabian Eckel, Sigismund Werner, and Valerius
Rosenheyn. His adherents were called "Neutrals,"
because they declined to affiliate with any of the existing
churches.

#### 263. Schwenckfeldt's Doctrine.

In 1526 Schwenckfeldt wrote to Paul Speratus:
Since by the preaching of the Gospel as set forth by
Luther so few people amended their lives, the thought
had occurred to him that "something must still be lacking,
whatever that may be." Endeavoring to supply this
defect, Schwenckfeldt taught: Grace cannot be imparted
by any creature, bodily word, writing, or sacrament,
but only by the omnipotent, eternal Word proceeding
from the mouth of God.Whatever is external is a mere
symbol and image of God, able neither to bring God
into the soul nor to produce faith or an inward experience
of divine life. "Mark well" says he, "God is not in
need of external things and means for His internal grace
and spiritual action. For even Christ, according to the
flesh, was a hindrance to grace and [the Spirit] of God,
and had to be translated into the heavenly mode of
being that the grace of the Holy Spirit might come to us
... Whoever endeavors to come from without and
through external means into the inner [the heart] does
not understand the course of grace. God works without
all means and pictures ... Man must forget and drop
everything, and be free and tranquil for the inbreathing
[Einsprechen, inspiration], and be drawn away from all
creatures, giving himself up to God altogether."

Schwenckfeldt continues: The Holy Spirit enters
the quiet soul only through the eternal Word, which
"proceeds from the mouth of God without means and
not at all through Scripture, external Word, Sacrament,
or any creature in heaven or on earth. God wants to
have this honor reserved solely to Himself through
Himself [without any means] He wants to pardon man,
teach him, impart the Holy Spirit to him, and save him.
He does not want to grant His grace, and effect illumination
and salvation through any creature; for even the
flesh of Christ was not a sufficient instrument for this
purpose before He was glorified, translated into the
heavenly places, and removed from our eyes.""Scripture
is for the external man; the Holy Spirit teaches everything
to the elect inwardly and is not in need of
Scripture to give faith to them and to save them."
Schwenckfeldt, who employed the term "revelation" for
this immediate operation of God, was inconsistent in
not rejecting Scripture, preaching, etc., altogether. But
when admitting these, he adds that he distinguishes
"God's own inner work from the external service."

Self-evidently, these views concerning the means of
grace had a corrupting influence also on other doctrines.
Saving faith, according to Schwenckfeldt, is not
trust in God's promise of pardon for Christ's sake, but
an immediate mystical relation of the soul to God.
Justification, says he, "is not only forgiveness and nonimputation
of sin, but also renewal of the heart." "We
must seek our justification and righteousness not in
Christ according to His first state [of humiliation], in a
manner historical," but according to His state of glorification,
in which He governs the Church. In order to
enhance the "glory of Christ"and have it shine and radiate
in a new light, Schwenckfeldt taught the "deification
of the flesh of Christ," thus corrupting the doctrine of
the exaltation and of the person of Christ in the direction
of Monophysitism. And the more his views were
opposed, the more he was enamored of, and engrossed
by, them, calling himself the "confessor and lover of the
glory of Christ."

Concerning the Lord's Supper, Schwenckfeldt
taught that the deified humanity of Christ is really
imparted and appropriated, not indeed through bread
and wine, but immediately (without the intervention of
any medium), internally, spiritually. The words of institution
mean: My body, which is given for you, is what
bread is, a food, i.e., a food for souls; and the new testament
in My blood is a chalice, i.e., a drink for the elect
to drink in the kingdom of God. Baptism, says
Schwenckfeldt, is the "baptizing of the heavenly High
Priest Jesus Christ, which occurs in the believing soul by
the Holy Ghost and by fire. Infant baptism is a human
ordinance, not merely useless, but detrimental to the
baptism of Christ." (Tschackert, 159ff.)

#### 264. The Antitrinitarians.

The first article of the Augsburg Confession makes a
special point of rejecting not only the ancient, but also
the "modern; Samosatenes," i.e., the Antitrinitarians,
who in the beginning of the Reformation began their
activity in Italy, Spain, Switzerland, and Germany.Most
of these "modern Arians and Antitrinitarians," as they
are called in the Twelfth Article of the Formula of
Concord came from the skeptical circles ofHumanists in
Italy. Concerning these rationalists and Epicureans the
Apology remarks: "Many [in Italy and elsewhere] even
publicly ridicule all religions, or, if they approve anything,
they approve such things only as are in harmony
with human reason, and regard the rest as fabulous and
like the tragedies of the poets."(CONC.TRIGL., 235, 28; C.
R. 9, 763.) Pope Leo X was generally regarded as being
one of those who spoke of the profitable "fables concerning
Christ."

According to a letter of warning to the Christians in
Antwerp, 1525, a fanatic (Rumpelgeist) there taught:
"Every man has the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is our
reason and understanding (ingenium et ratio naturalis).
Every man believes. There is neither hell nor damnation.
Every one will obtain eternal life. Nature teaches
that I should do unto my neighbor as I would have him
do unto me-to desire which is faith. The Law is not
violated by evil lust as long as I do not consent to lust.
Who has not the Holy Ghost has no sin for he has no
reason." (E. 53, 344; St. L. 21a 730; Enders 5, 147.)

In his report on the Marburg Colloquy, October 5,
1529,Melanchthon remarks: "We have heard that some
of them [the Strassburgers] speak of the Deity as the
Jews do, as though Christ were not God by nature. (C.
R. 1, 1099.) At Marburg, Zwingli remarked that some
had spoken incorrectly concerning the Trinity, and that
Haetzer had written a book against the divinity of
Christ, which he,Zwingli, had not permitted to be published."
(1103.)

In a letter of Luther to Bugenhagen, 1532 we read:
"Your undertaking [of publishing a writing of
Athanasius concerning the Trinity] is Christian and
wholesome in this our most corrupt time, in which all
articles of faith in general are attacked by the servants of
Satan, and the one concerning the Trinity is in particular
beginning to be derided confidently by some skeptics
and Epicureans. These are ably assisted not only by
those Italian grammarians [Humanists] and orators,
which they flatter themselves to be, but also by some
Italico-German vipers and others, or, as you are accustomed
to call them, viper-aspides, who sow their seed
here and there in their discourses and writings, and, as
Paul says [2 Tim. 2, {{< hiddenanchor 17 >}}17{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, eat as doth a canker (gar sehr
um sich fressen) and promote godlessness, about which
they, when among themselves, laugh so complacently
and are so happy that one can hardly believe it." (St. L.
14, 326; Enders 9, 252.)

Some Antitrinitarians who affiliated with the
Anabaptists have already been referred to. Denk,
Haetzer, and others rejected the Apostles'Creed because
of their opposition to the doctrine of the Trinity.
Haetzer, as stated wrote a book against the deity of
Christ in which he denied the tripersonality of God and
the preexistence of the Logos, and blasphemously designated
the belief in the deity of Christ as "superstition"
and the trust in His satisfaction as "drinking on the
score of Christ (ein Zechen auf die Kreide Christi)."
According to Denk, Christ is merely an example showing
us how to redeem ourselves which we are all able to
do because there is still within us a seed of the divine
Word and light. (Tschackert, 143, 461.) It was of Denk
that Capito wrote, 1526: "At Nuernberg the schoolteacher
at St. Sebald denied that the Holy Ghost and the
Son are equal to the Father, and for this reason he was
expelled." (Plitt, Augustana 1, 153.)

At Strassburg the Anabaptists were publicly
charged, in 1526,with denying the Trinity; in 1529,with
denying the deity of Christ. In 1527 Urban Regius spoke
of the Anabaptists in Augsburg as maintaining that
Christ was merely a teacher of a Christian life. In the
same year Althamer of Nuernberg published his book
Against the New Jews and Arians under the Christian
Name Who Deny the Deity of Christ. In 1529 Osiander
wrote concerning Anabaptists in Nuernberg: "It is well
known, and may be proved by their own writings, that
they deny and contradict the sublime article of our faith
concerning the Holy Trinity, from which it follows
immediately that they also deny the deity of Christ."
"Christ is not the natural, true Son of God," such was
also the accusation made by Justus Menius in his book
concerning the Doctrines and Secrets of the Anabaptists.
In his Sermons on the Life of Luther, Mathesius said
"Now the Anabaptists speak most contemptuously of
the deity of Jesus Christ ... This was their chief article
that they despised the written Word, the Holy Bible, and
believed nothing or very little of Jesus Christ the eternal
Son of God."

#### 265. Franck, Campanus, Ochino, Servetus, Blandrata, etc.

Sebastian Franck and John Campanus must also be
numbered among the Antitrinitarians. Franck was a
pantheist, who had been pastor in the vicinity of
Nuernberg till 1528, when he resigned and engaged in
soap manufacturing, writing, and printing. Campanus
appeared in Wittenberg, 1527. At the Colloquy of
Marburg he endeavored to unite Luther and Zwingli by
explaining the words: "This is My body" to mean: This
is a body created by Me. In 1530 he published a book:
"Against the Entire World after the Apostles-Contra
Totum post Apostolos Mundum," in which he taught that
the Son is inferior to the Father, and denied the personality
of the Holy Spirit."He argues," says Melanchthon,
who in his letters frequently refers to the "blasphemies
of Campanus," "that Christ is not God; that the Holy
Spirit is not God; that original sin is an empty word.
Finally there is nothing which he does not transform
into philosophy." (C. R. 2, 33. 34. 93. 29. 513; 9, 763; 10,
132.) When Campanus endeavored to spread his doctrines,
he was banished from Saxony, 1531.He returned
to Juelich, where he preached on the imminence of
Judgment Day, with the result that the peasants sold
their property and declined to work any longer.
Campanus was imprisoned for twenty years and died
1575.

Prominent among the numerous Antitrinitarians
who came from Italy were Ochino, Servetus, Gribaldo,
Gentile, Blandrata, and Alciati. Bernardino Ochino,
born 1487, was Vicar-General of the Capuchins and a
renowned pulpit orator in Siena. In 1542 he was compelled
to leave Italy in order to escape the Inquisition.
He served the Italian congregation in Zurich from 1555
to 1564, when he was banished because he had defended
polygamy. He died in Austerlitz, 1665. In his Thirty
Dialogs, published 1563, he rejects the doctrines of the
Trinity, of the deity of Christ, and of the atonement.
(Herzog R. 14, 256.)-Michael Servetus was born in
1511 and educated at Saragossa and Toulouse. In 1531,
at Hagenau, Alsace, he published De Trinitatis Erroribus
Libri Vll. He was opposed by Zwingli and
Oecolampadius. In 1540 he wrote his Christianismi
Restitutio, a voluminous book, which he published in
1553. In it he opposes the Trinity as an unbiblical and
satanic doctrine, and at the same time rejects original
sin and infant baptism. The result was that, while pass-
ing through Geneva on his way to Italy, he was arrested
at the instance of Calvin, tried, condemned, and burned
at the stake, October 27, 1553-an act which was
approved also by Melanchthon. (C. R. 8, 362; 9, 763.)-
Matteo Gribaldo, in 1554, uttered tritheistic views concerning
the Trinity in the Italian congregation at
Geneva. Arrested in Bern, he retracted his doctrine.He
died 1564.-John Valentine Gentile also belonged to
the Italian fugitives in Geneva. In 1558 he signed an
orthodox confession concerning the Trinity. Before
long, however, he relapsed into his Antitrinitarian
errors. He was finally beheaded at Bern. (Herzog R. 6,
518.)

George Blandrata, born 1515, was influenced by
Gribaldo. Fearing for his liberty, he left Geneva and
went to Poland and thence to Transylvania. Here he
published his Confessio Antitrinitaria, and was instrumental
in introducing Unitarianism into Transylvania.
He died after 1585. In 1558 Gianpaolo Alciati of
Piedmont accompanied Blandrata to Poland.He taught
that Christ was inferior to the Father, and denied that
there were two natures in Christ.

#### 266. Davidis and Socinus.

Francis Davidis in Transylvania was an
Antitrinitarian of the most radical stripe. He had studied
in Wittenberg 1545 and 1548. In 1552 he joined the
Lutherans, in 1559 the Calvinists. Secretly after 1560
and publicly since 1566 he cooperated with Blandrata to
introduce Unitarianism in Transylvania. In numerous
disputations he attacked the doctrine of the Trinity as
unscriptural and contradictory. In 1567 he published
his views in De Falso et Vera Unius Dei Patris, Filii et
Spiritus Sancti Cognitione Libri Duo.He contended that
the doctrine of the Trinity was the source of all idolatry
in the Church; that Christ, though born of Mary in a
supernatural way, was preexistent only in the decree of
God, and that the Holy Spirit was merely a power emanating
from God for our sanctification.He also rejected
infant baptism and the Lord's Supper. After the prince
and the greater part of the nobility had been won for
Unitarianism, Davidis, in 1568, was made
Superintendent of the Unitarian Church in
Transylvania. In 1571 religious liberty was proclaimed,
and Unitarians, Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists
were tolerated equally. Before long, however, a reaction
set in. The Catholic Stephan Bathory,who succeeded to
the throne, removed the Unitarians from his court and
surrounded himself with Jesuits. On March 29, 1579,
Davidis delivered a sermon against the adoration of
Christ, declaring it to be the same idolatry as the invocation
of Mary and the saints. Three days after he was
deposed and imprisoned. In the proceedings instituted
against him he was convicted as a blasphemer and sentenced
to imprisonment for life. He died in prison,
November 15, 1579, prophesying the final downfall of
all "false dogmas," meaning, of course, the doctrines
which _______combated.

In Poland, especially since 1548, the humanistic
and liberal-minded nobility opposed the Catholic clergy
and protected Protestants and later on also fugitive
Antitrinitarians. Among these were the Italians Francis
Lismanio, Gregory Pauli, and Peter Statorius. These
Unitarians, however, lacked unity and harmony. They
disagreed on infant baptism, the preexistence and adoration
of Christ, etc. These dissensions continued until
Faustus Socinus (born at Siena 1539, died 1604 in
Poland) arrived.He was the nephew of the skeptical and
liberal-minded Laelius Socinus (Lelio Sozzini) who left
Italy in 1542, when the Inquisition was established
there, and died in Zurich, 1562.

Faustus Socinus claimed that he had received his
ideas from his uncle Laelius. In 1562 he published
anonymously an explanation of the first chapter of the
Gospel of St. John, which, contained the entire program
of Unitarianism. In 1578 he followed an invitation of
Blandrata to oppose non-adorantism (the doctrine that
Christ must not be adored) as taught by Davidis. In the
following year Faustus removed to Poland, where he
endeavored to unite the various Unitarian parties: the
Anabaptists, Non-adorantes, the believers in the preexistence
of Christ, etc., and their opponents. The growth
of Unitarianism in Poland was rapid. A school flourished
in Rakow numbering in its palmy days about
1,000 scholars.However here, too, a Jesuitic reaction set
in. In 1638 the school at Rakow was destroyed, the
printery closed, and the teachers and ministers expelled.
In 1658 the Unitarians generally were banished as traitors,
and in 1661 the rigorous laws against Unitarianism
were confirmed.

The chief source of the Antitrinitarian and
Socinian doctrine is the Racovian Catechism, published
1605 in the Polish and 1609 in the Latin language under
the title: "Catechism of the Churches in the Kingdom of
Poland which affirm that no one besides the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ is that One God of Israel."It teaches:
There is but one divine person;Christ is a mere man;
the doctrine concerning the deity of Christ is false; as a
reward for His sinless life, God has given Christ all
power in heaven and on earth; as such, as God's representative
(homo Deus factus, the man made God), He
may be adored; there is no original sin; with the help of
God, that is to say,with the commandments and promises
of God revealed by Christ, man may acquire salvation;
he is able to keep these commandments, though
not perfectly;man's shortcomings are pardoned by God
on account of his good intention; an atonement by
Christ is not required for this purpose; moreover, the
doctrine of atonement must be opposed as false and
pernicious; by His death Christ merely sealed His doctrine;
all who obey His commandments are adherents
of Christ; these will participate in His dominion; the
wicked and the devils will be annihilated; there is no
such thing as eternal punishment; whatever in the Bible
comports with human reason and serves moral ends is
inspired; the Old Testament is superfluous for
Christians, because all matters pertaining to religion are
contained better and clearer in the New Testament.
(Tschackert, 473.)

Evidently, in every detail, Antitrinitarianism and
Socinianism are absolutely incompatible with, and
destructive of, the very essence of Christianity. The
Apology declares that the deniers of the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity "are outside of the Church of Christ and
are idolaters, and insult God." (103, 1.) This verdict is
confirmed by Article XII of the Formula of Concord.
(843, 30; 1103, 39.)

