---
Title: Historical Introductions to the Lutheran Confessions 
subtitle: XXIII. Origin, Subscription, Character, etc., of Formula of Concord.
usesubtitle: true
Weight: 23
---

#### 267. Lutherans Yearning for a Godly Peace.

A holy zeal for the purity and unity of doctrine is
not at all incompatible, rather always and of necessity
connected with an earnest desire for peace; not, indeed,
a peace at any price, but a truly Christian and godly
peace, a peace consistent with the divine truth. Also in
the loyal Lutherans, who during the controversies after
Luther's death faithfully adhered to their Confessions,
the fervent desire for such a godly peace grew in proportion
as the dissensions increased. While Calvinists
and Crypto-Calvinists were the advocates of a unionistic
compromise, true Lutherans everywhere stood for a
union based on the truth as taught by Luther and contained
in the Lutheran Confessions. Though yearning
for peace and praying that the controversies might
cease, they were determined that the Lutheran Church
should never be contaminated with indifferentism or
unionism, nor with any teaching deviating in the least
from the divine truth.
As a result, earnest and repeated efforts to restore
unity and peace were made everywhere by Lutheran
princes as well as by theologians, especially the theologians
who had not participated in the controversies, but
for all that were no less concerned about the maintenance
of pure Lutheranism and no less opposed to a
peace at the expense of the divine truth than the others.
As early as 1553 Flacius and Gallus published their
Provokation oder Erbieten der adiaphorischen Sachen
halben, auf Erkenntnis und Urteil der Kirchen. In this
Appeal they urged that ten or twenty competent men
who hitherto had not participated in the public controversy
be appointed to decide the chief differences
between themselves and the Interimists. In the two following
years Flacius and Gallus continued their endeavors
to interest influential men in Saxony and other
places for their plan.Melanchthon and his Wittenberg
colleagues, however, maintained silence in the matter.
At the behest of the dukes of Thuringia, Amsdorf,
Stolz, Aurifaber, Schnepf, and Strigel met at Weimar in
the early part of 1553 to discuss the conditions of peace.
Opposed as they were to a peace by agreeing to disagree
or by ignoring the differences and past contentions, they
demanded that synergism, Majorism, adiaphorism, as
also the doctrines of Zwingli Osiander, and
Schwenckfeldt, be publicly rejected by the
Wittenbergers. (Preger 2, 4. 7.)

#### 268. Pacific Overtures of Flacius.

Soon after the convention in Weimar, Gottschalk
Praetorius, rector of the school in Magdeburg, and
Hubertus Languet from Burgundy (an intimate friend
of Melanchthon and a guest at his table, who later on
maliciously slandered Flacius) had an interview with
Flacius, in which the latter submitted the conditions on
which peace might be established. However, a letter
written in this matter by Praetorius, in April, 1556, was
not answered by Melanchthon, who, moreover, insinuated
that Flacius's object merely was to kindle hatred.
(C.R. 8, 794.)

In May, 1556, Flacius, continuing his peace efforts,
forwarded to Paul Eber his "Mild Proposals, Linde
Vorschlaege, dadurch man gottselige und notwendige
friedliche Vergleichung machen koennte zwischen den
Wittenbergischen und Leipzigischen Theologen in
causa Adiaphoristica und den andern, so wider sie
geschrieben haben." According to these Proposals,
Flacius demanded that, in a publication signed by the
theologians of both parties, the Pope be denounced as
the true Antichrist, the Augsburg Interim be rejected,
the proposition: "Good works are necessary to salvation,"
be condemned, also the errors of Zwingli and
Osiander. "The good Lord knows," said Flacius, "that
every day and hour I consider and plan earnestly how
the affair of the Adiaphorists might be settled in a
Christian manner." But he added that he could not be
satisfied until, by repentance, "they wipe out their sin,
denial, apostasy, and persecution, instead of increasing
them by their excuses." But Flacius received an answer
neither from Eber nor from Melanchthon. Instead, the
Wittenbergers, with the silent consent of Melanchthon,
circulated a caricature in which Flacius was accorded
the role of a braying ass being crowned by other asses
with a soiled crown. (Preger 2, 11. 13.)

Another offer of Flacius to meet Melanchthon in
Wittenberg and discuss the matter personally was also
declined. July 15, 1556,Melanchthon wrote: "I enjoyed
a sweet friendship and familiarity with Illyricus, and I
would gladly confer with him on the entire doctrine.
But before this he has spread things which I had neither
said nor thought, wherefore now, too, I fear treachery
(insidias metuo)." Timid as he was,Melanchthon really
feared for his life at the contemplated colloquy, because
the statement of Chytraeus: "As long as Flacius and
Melanchthon are alive, unity will not be restored," had
been reported to him in the form: unless Philip were
put out of the way, unity would not be possible."None
of my friends," he wrote, "is willing to attend the colloquy,
and they believe that it is not safe for me to confer
with him [Flacius] alone." (C. R. 8, 798.) Considering
Melanchthon's answer as insincere and sophistical,
Flacius declared that, after having earnestly sought
peace in a private way, he would now appeal to the
Church. He did so by publishing "Von der Einigkeit,
Concerning Unity," a book which he had written before
he made his pacific overtures to Melanchthon. (Preger
2, 17. 22.)

However, induced by a letter of Fabricius of
Meissen (August 24, 1556), Flacius made a further
effort, addressing Melanchthon in a letter of September
1, 1556, in which he implored him to make his peace
with God and the Church by an unequivocal disavowal
of Adiaphorism. As a result, Melanchthon wrote his
famous letter of September 5, 1556, referred to in our
chapter on the Adiaphoristic Controversy, in which he
admitted in a qualified way that he had sinned in the
matter. In his reply of September 16, 1556, Flacius again
declared that his object was not any triumph or glory
for himself, but "only the maintenance of truth and the
rooting out of error," and that nothing was able to
remove the offense given by Melanchthon and the
Adiaphorists but a clear confession of the truth and an
unequivocal rejection of error. Melanchthon, however,
broke off the correspondence and continued to nurse
his animosity against Flacius. (Preger 2, 29f.)

#### 269. Lower Saxons Endeavoring to Mediate between Melanchthon and Flacius.

Despite his experiences with Melanchthon, Flacius
did not allow himself to be discouraged in his efforts to
bring about unity and peace. Embracing an opportunity
which a correspondence with the clergy of Lower
Saxony concerning Schwenckfeldt offered him, he
requested the Lower Saxons to mediate between himself
and Melanchthon, submitting for this purpose articles,
differing from the Mild Proposals only in expressly mentioning
also the Leipzig Interim. The request was granted,
and four superintendents, accompanied by four
ministers, were delegated for the purpose to
Wittenberg.The delegates were: from Luebeck:Valentin
Curtius and Dionysius Schunemann; from Hamburg:
Paul von Eitzen and Westphal; from Lueneburg: F.
Henning and Antonius Wippermann; from Brunswick:
Moerlin and Chemnitz. After agreeing, at Brunswick,
January 14, 1557, on theses based on those of Flacius,
and after conferring with Flacius in Magdeburg,
January 17, 1557 they unexpectedly, January 19, arrived
in Wlttenberg, offering their services as mediators.

Melanchthon received them in a friendly manner,
but when, on the following day,Moerlin read the articles
of agreement, he denounced Flacius and Gallus as
having slandered him, and declined to treat with the
Lower Saxons on the basis of the "Flacian theses." On
January 21 the delegation submitted eight new articles.
Of these the third read: "All corruptions which militate
against the pure apostolic doctrine and that of the
Augsburg Confession shall be eliminated from the article
of justification, in particular the corruption concerning
the necessity of good works to salvation." Article VII
requested Melanchthon to make a public statement
concerning the adiaphora and the necessity of good
works, declaring his agreement with the confession of
our Church. (Preger 2, 37.)

The presentation of these articles had a most unfavorable
effect on Melanchthon. The Saxon mediators
report that he was excited to such an extent that they
feared he would be taken seriously ill. In a most violent
manner Melanchthon charged the delegation with
treacherously conspiring with Flacius to ensnare him.
However, appeased by Paul Eber, he finally consented to
reply in writing on the morrow, January 22. In his
answer Melanchthon declared: For thirty years he had
borne the heavy burdens of the Church and encountered
most insidious conflicts; they therefore ought now
to have had compassion with him instead of assaulting
him alone; it was being fulfilled what Sturm had once
told him on leaving:We shall meet again to crucify you.
Sparing Flacius, they had presented articles with the sole
purpose of forcing him and others to cut their own
throats. As to the articles themselves, Melanchthon
objected to the third, because, he said, it falsely charged
him and others with having taught and defended errors
regarding justification. He declined Article VII because
the publication there required was unnecessary, since it
might easily be learned from his many writings what he
had taught in the matter there referred to. (Preger 2, 38.
40.)

Fearing that the Lower Saxon mediators might
yield and make concessions detrimental to the truth,
Flacius and his adherents (Wigand, Baumgartner,
Judex, Albert Christiani, P. Arbiter, H. Brenz, Antonius
Otto) assembled in Coswig, a place not very far from
Wittenberg. In a letter, dated January 21, 1557, they
admonished the Saxon mediators not to yield anything
contrary to the divine truth but firmly to insist on the
elimination of the errors connected with the Interim (ut
id iugulum recte iuguletis). Flacius also requested Count
of Ungnad first to meet them in Coswig, and then go to
Wittenberg in order to assist in winning Melanchthon
for his peace proposals. In the letter to the Count,
Flacius remarked: he feared that the mediators were
administering to Melanchthon "sweet rather than
wholesome and strong medicine." (Preger 2, 42.) In a
similar manner Pastor Michael Stiefel was urged to go
to Wittenberg to influence Melanchthon. At the same
time Judex was sent to implore the Saxon delegates not
to discontinue their efforts, and adopt no resolution
before submitting it also to them [the Magdeburgers]
for consideration.No news having arrived by Saturday,
January 23, an additional letter was dispatched to
Wittenberg, written in the same spirit of anxiety, and
urging the mediators to stand firm, not to yield, and to
continue their efforts until successful, since failure, they
said would not only expose them to ridicule, but greatly
damage the Church. (2, 42f.)

On the evening of the same day Moerlin Hennig,
and Westphal arrived in Coswig. Moerlin reported on
their discussions, and submitted the articles presented
to Melanchthon together with the latter's answer.At the
same time he requested the Flacians to overlook the
harsh language of Philip, telling also of the animosity
and general opposition they had met with in
Wittenberg, where the students, he said, had even
threatened to stone them. Having heard the report the
Flacians withdrew for a brief consultation. Their
impression was (which they neither made any efforts to
hide) that in deference to Melanchthon the Saxons had
not been sufficiently careful in seeking only the honor of
God, the welfare of the Church, and the true conversion
of sinners. In a meeting held on Sunday, January 24,
Wigand and Flacius declared their dissatisfaction with
the proceedings in Wittenberg.Referring particularly to
the shocking stubbornness ofMelanchthon, the former
urged the Saxon delegates to regard God higher than
men, and earnestly and openly to call the Wittenbergers
to repentance. He thereupon handed the delegates,
besides a list of Adiaphoristic errors and of offensive
statements culled from Major's homilies, two sealed letters,
which contained their strictures on the eight articles
presented to Melanchthon, their answer to
Melanchthon's charges, etc. Flacius said in the meeting:
This matter troubled him day and night; hope for the
conversion of the Adiaphorists who had despised the
admonition, not of men but of the Holy Spirit, was constantly
decreasing; having already yielded more than he
should have done, he now must insist that, in a publication
signed by both parties, the Leipzig Interim be condemned
by name, and that also in the future the people
be warned against such sins and be called to repentance.
Flacius furthermore declared that his theses should have
been either retained or refuted. In this he was supported
by Otto of Nordhausen.Moerlin answered, irritated:
They had presented other articles because Melanchthon
had declined the first; if any one was able to frame better
theses, he was at liberty to do so.Discouraged and illhumored,
the delegation returned to Wittenberg,
where, too, animosity had reached its climax. For in his
sermon, delivered Sunday in Bugenhagen's pulpit, and
in the presence of Melanchthon and the other professors,
John Curio had spoken of Flacius as "the rascal and
knave (Schalk und Bube)," and even referred to the
Lower Saxon delegates in unfriendly terms. Also a filthy
and insulting pasquil, perhaps composed by Paul Crell,
in which Flacius and the Saxon delegates were reviled,
was circulated in Wittenberg and even sent to Coswig.
(Preger 2, 49.) The first lines of the pasquil ran thus;
"Qui huc venistis legati Illyrici permerdati, Ab illo concacati,
Polypragmones inflati, Illius natibus nati, Quae communio
veritati,Mendacio et vanitati?" (C. R. 9, 50. 235.)

Having read the sealed letters and convinced themselves
that Melanchthon could never be induced to
accede to the demands of the Magdeburgers, the delegation
(with the exception of Chemnitz) immediately
returned to Coswig, January 25. Here they declared:
They had not delivered the list of errors to
Melanchthon; if they had done so, deliberations would
have been broken off immediately; only the charges
with respect to justification had been transmitted; they
therefore requested the Magdeburgers to declare their
agreement with the articles already submitted to
Melanchthon. Seeing no other course, the
Magdeburgers finally yielded, though reluctantly, and
not without protests and some changes in the articles.
Flacius, too, consented, but "only with a wounded conscience,"
as he declared.Having returned to Wittenberg,
the delegates transmitted the modified articles together
with the additions of the Magdeburgers to
Melanchthon.

In his answer of January 27 to the Lower Saxon pastors,
Melanchthon said in part: "You know that in the
last thirty years a great confusion of opinions obtained
in which it was difficult not to stumble somewhere.And
many hypocrites have been, and still are, hostile in particular
to me. I was also drawn into the insidious deliberations
of the princes. If, therefore, I have either stumbled
anywhere or been too lukewarm in any matter, I
ask God and the churches to forgive me and shall submit
to the verdict of the Church ... As to the Flacian
quarrels, however, concerning which you are now treating
with me so eagerly, and into which Flacius has
injected many foreign matters, you yourselves know
that this affair pertains also to many others, and that,
without offending them, I cannot decide and settle anything
(me aliquid statuere posse) ... This now I desire to
be my last answer (hanc volo nunc meam postremam
responsionem esse); if it does not satisfy you, I appeal to
the verdict of the Church in which you, too, will be
judges.May the Son of God govern all of us, and grant
that we be one in Him!"As to the articles submitted by
the delegates,Melanchthon rejected all the changes and
additions suggested by the Magdeburgers. He declared
that he was not willing to enter into a discussion of the
adiaphora, nor in any way to censure the honorable
men who had participated in the deliberations concerning
the Leipzig Interim. (C. R. 9, 62.)

#### 270. Futile Efforts of Duke John Albrecht.

Four weeks later Duke John Albrecht of
Mecklenburg sent messengers to Wittenberg for the
same purpose, viz., of mediating between Melanchthon
and Flacius, Melanchthon in particular having previously
requested him to frame articles which might serve
as a basis of peace. The articles, composed by the theologians
and counselors of the Duke, were more severe
than those of the Lower Saxons. George Venetus, professor
at Rostock, and Counselor Andrew Mylius were
commissioned to present them, first at Wittenberg, then
at Magdeburg. When the articles were submitted to
Melanchthon, he again fell into a state of violent agitation.
The report says: "As soon as he noticed that
Adiaphorism was criticized, and that he was requested
to reject it even if only in a mild form, he instantly
sprang up with great impatience and would not permit
them [the delegates] to finish their speech (although
they most earnestly, in the name of their prince,
requested to be heard), but burst forth into invectives
and denunciations of Illyricus and others, and finally
also declaimed against the prince himself and his delegates,
vociferating that Illyricus secretly entertained
many repulsive errors, etc." On February 27,
Melanchthon delivered his answer to the delegates.
When these urged him to give a more favorable reply, he
again interrupted them, exclaiming:"Oppress me, if you
so desire; such is the lot of the peaceful ... I commend
myself to God." After Melanchthon had left, Peucer,
who had accompanied him, harshly told the delegates:
"Don't trouble my father-in-law any more with such
matters. Ihr sollt forthin meinen Schwaeher zufrieden
lassen mit solchen Haendeln." (9, 106f.)

Regarding the last (8) of the articles submitted by
the delegates of Duke Albrecht which dealt with the
Adiaphora, Melanchthon declared in his answer of
February 27: "I should not be astonished to have these
two conditions [to confess the Adiaphoristic errors, etc.]
imposed on me if I had been an enemy. The action of
the Saxon pastors was milder. I may have been lukewarm
in some transactions, but I certainly have never
been an enemy ... Therefore I clearly state that I do not
assent to these presentations [of Duke Albrecht], which
are cunningly framed so that, if I accept them, I myself
may cut my throat (ut me, si eas recepero, ipse iugulem)."
(C. R. 9, 104.)

The Magdeburgers refused to participate in these
efforts of Count Albrecht, chiefly because, as they said,
there was no hope for peace as long as Melanchthon
remained under the influence of his Wittenberg friends.
But even now Flacius did not entirely abandon his
attempts to bring about a godly peace. In 1557 he asked
Paul Vergerius, who passed Jena on his way to
Wittenberg, to treat with Melanchthon on the
Adiaphoristic question. Melanchthon, however is
reported to have said: "Omit that; let us treat of other
things." Flacius also wrote to King Christian III of
Denmark to influence Elector August to abolish the
Adiaphoristic errors, but apparently without any result.

#### 271. Clash at Colloquy in Worms, 1557.

The Diet at Regensburg,which adjourned in March
of 1557, resolved that a colloquy be held at Worms to
bring about an agreement between the Lutheran and
Roman parties of the Empire. In order to prepare for
the colloquy, a convention was held by the Lutherans in
June, 1557, at Frankfort-on-the-Main. June 30 a resolution
was adopted to the effect that all controversies
among the Lutherans be suspended, and the Romanists
be told at the prospective colloquy that the Lutherans
were all agreed in the chief points of doctrine. Against
this resolution Nicholas Gallus and several others
entered their protest. Self-evidently, also Flacius and his
adherents who had always held that the controverted
issues involved essential points of doctrine, could not
assent to the resolution without violating their conscience,
and denying their convictions and the truth as
they saw it. Such being the situation, the wise thing for
the Lutherans to do would have been to decline the colloquy.
For, since also Ducal Saxony with its stanch
Lutherans was held to attend it, a public humiliating
clash of the Lutherans was unavoidable.

Before the formal opening of the colloquy, the
Thuringian delegates at Worms received a letter from
Flacius, dated August 9, 1557 in which he admonished
them to make a determined confession, and to induce
the other Lutheran theologians to reject the Interim,
Adiaphorism, Majorism, Osiandrism and
Zwinglianism. This was necessary, said Flacius, because
the Romanists would, no doubt exploit the concessions
made in the Leipzig Interim and the dissensions existing
among the Lutherans. (C. R. 9, l99ff.). Flacius
expressed the same views in an opinion to the dukes of
Saxony, who, in turn, gave corresponding instructions
to their delegates in Worms. In a letter dated August 20,
1557 Duke John Frederick said it was impossible that, in
defending the Augsburg Confession against the
Romanists, the Lutherans could stand as one man and
speak as with one mouth (fuer einen Mann und also ex
uno ore), if they had not previously come to an agreement
among themselves and condemned the errors.
For otherwise the Papists would be able to defeat the
Lutherans with their own sword i.e., their own polemical
publications. (231.) On the same day, August 20,
1557, Flacius repeated his sentiments and admonitions
in letters to Schnepf,Moerlin, and Sarcerius. (232ff.)

In a meeting of the Lutheran theologians at
Worms, held September 5, Dr. Basilius Monner, professor
of jurisprudence at Jena made a motion in keeping
with his instructions and the admonitions of Flacius,
whereupon Erhard Schnepf,professor in Jena, read a list
of the errors that ought to be rejected. But the majority,
led by Melanchthon, opposed the motion. A breach
seemed unavoidable. For Duke John Frederick had
decided that his theologians could not participate in the
colloquy with Lutherans who refused to reject errors
conflicting with the Augsburg Confession, nor recognize
them as pure, faithful, loyal, and true members and
adherents of the Augsburg Confession, the Apology, and
the Smalcald Articles. (Preger 2, 67.) The imminent clash
was temporarily warded off by the concession on the
part of the Melanchthonians that the Thuringian theologians
should be allowed freely to express their opinion
on any article discussed at the colloquy. At the session
held September 11 1667, however, Bishop Michael
Helding demanded to know whether the Lutherans
excluded the Zwinglians, Calvinists, Osiandrists and
Flacians (in the doctrine De Servo Arbitrio) from the
Augsburg Confession. The Jesuit Canisius plied the
Lutherans with similar questions:Whether they considered
Osiander, Major, and others adherents of the
Augustana. Melanchthon declared evasively that all
evangelical delegates and pastors present were agreed in
the Augsburg Confession. As a result the Thuringians
decided to enter their protest. In a special meeting of the
Lutherans the majority threatened to exclude the
Thuringians from all following sessions if they dared to
express their protest [containing the list of errors which
they rejected] before the Papists. The consequence was
that the Thuringians presented their protest in writing
to the President, Julius Pflug, and departed from
Worms. The Romanists, who from the beginning had
been opposed to the colloquy, refused to treat with the
remaining Lutheran theologians, because they said, it
was impossible to know who the true adherents of the
Augsburg Confession were with whom, according to the
Regensburg Resolution, they were to deal.

#### 272. Efforts of Princes to Restore Unity: Frankfort Recess.

The Colloquy of Worms had increased the enmity
and animosity among the Lutherans. It had brought
their quarrels to a climax, and given official publicity to
the dissensions existing among them,--a situation
which was unscrupulously exploited by the Romanists
also politically, their sinister object being to rob the
Lutherans of the privileges guaranteed by the Augsburg
Peace, and to compel them to return to the Roman fold.
In particular the Jesuits stressed the point that the dissensions
among the Lutherans proved conclusively that
they had abandoned the Augsburg Confession to the
adherents of which alone the provisions of the
Augsburg Peace of 1555 applied. At the same time they
embraced the opportunity to spread false reports con-
cerning all manner of heresies that were tolerated in the
Lutheran churches. This roused the Lutheran princes,
who according to the Augsburg Peace Treaty were
responsible to the Empire for the religious conditions
within their territories, to bend all their energies toward
healing the breach and restoring religious unity within
their churches. Efforts to this effect were made especially
at Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1558, and at Naumburg,
1561. But instead of promoting peace among the
Lutherans also these conventions of the princes merely
poured oil into the flames by adding new subjects of
dissension, increasing the general distrust, and confirming
the conviction that Luther's doctrine of the Lord's
Supper was in danger indeed. For, instead of insisting
on a clear confession of the truth and an unequivocal
rejection of error, the princes endeavored to establish
peace by ignoring, veiling, and compromising the differences.

At Frankfort, Otto Henry of the Palatinate,
Augustus of Saxony, Joachim of Brandenburg,
Wolfgang of Zweibruecken, Christopher of
Wuerttemberg, and Philip of Hesse discussed the religious
situation and, on March 18, 1558, signed the socalled
Frankfort Recess (Agreement), in which they
again solemnly pledged their adherence to the Holy
Scriptures, the Ecumenical Symbols, the Augsburg
Confession of 1530, and its Apology. (C. R. 9, 494.) In the
Recess the princes stated that the existing dissensions
encouraged the Romanists to proceed against the
Lutherans, who, the princes declared, were not disagreed
in their confession. In four articles the controverted
questions concerning justification, good works,
the Lord's Supper, and the adiaphora were dealt with,
but in vague and ambiguous terms, the articles being
based on Melanchthon's anti-Flacian opinion ofMarch
4, 1558. (499ff.; 462ff.)

When the Frankfort Recess was submitted for subscription
to the estates who had not been present at
Frankfort, it failed to receive the expected approval. It
was criticized by the theologians of Anhalt,Henneberg,
Mecklenburg, Pomerania, the Lower Saxon cities, and
Regensburg. The strongest opposition, however, came
from Ducal Saxony,where Flacius attacked the Recess in
two books. The first was entitled: "Refutatio Samaritani
Interim, in quo vera religio cum sectis et corruptelis
scelerate et perniciose confunditur--Refutation of the
Samaritan Interim, in which the true religion is criminally
and perniciously confounded with the sects." The
other: "Grund und Ursach', warum das Frankfurtisch
Interim in keinem Wege anzunehmen sei--Reason and
Cause why the Frankfort Interim must Not be
Adopted." The chief objections of Flacius were: 1. The
Smalcald Articles should have been included in the confessions
subscribed to. 2. The differences within the
Lutheran Church should not have been treated as questions
of minor import. 3.Major's statement should have
been rejected as simply false, and not merely when falsely
interpreted. 4. The statements concerning the Lord's
Supper are "dark, general, and ambiguous," hence
Crypto-Calvinistic. 5. The article on the adiaphora is
ambiguous and altogether unsatisfactory. 6. The measures
adopted to suppress theological discussions and
controversies would lead to suppression of the truth
("binding the mouth of the Holy Ghost") and tyrannizing
of the churches by the princes. (Preger 2, 74.)

In his attitude Flacius was supported by his colleagues
in Jena and by Duke John Frederick. When a
delegation appeared requesting him to sign the Recess,
he declined and ordered his theologians to set forth his
objection in a special book. Elector August, in turn,
charged Melanchthon to write an Apology of the Recess
against the ducal theologians; which, again, was
answered by Flacius. In order to unite the opponents of
the Recess, John Frederick invited the Lower Saxons to
attend a convention in Magdeburg. When this failed,
Flacius induced the Duke to publish a book treating
particularly the doctrinal differences within the
Lutheran Church. In the drafting and revision of this
Book of Confutation, as it was called, the following theologians
participated: Strigel, Schnepf, Andrew Huegel,
John Stoessel, Simon Musaeus, Joachim Moerlin,
Sarcerius,Aurifaber, and Flacius.November 28, 1558, it
received the sanction of the dukes. Among the
Melanchthonians the Book of Confutation, which had
made it a special point to refute and reject the errors of
the Wittenberg Philippists, caused consternation and
bitter resentment. For evidently its theological attitude
was incompatible with the Recess, and hence the breach
now seemed incurable and permanent. By order of
Elector August, Melanchthon, in the name of the
Wittenberg faculty, wrote an opinion of the Book of
Confutation. (C. R. 9, 763.) But contents as well as form
of this opinion merely served to confirm the ducal theologians
in their position. The Philippists also fortified
themselves by publishing the Corpus Doctrinae (Corpus
Philippicum or Misnicum), which contained writings
only of Melanchthon. The Frankfort Recess, therefore,
instead of bringing relief to the Lutherans, only
increased their mutual enmity and distrust. In order to
reconcile John Frederick, the Duke of Wuerttemberg
suggested a convention of princes at Fulda, on January
20, 1559. But when Elector August heard that besides
the Duke of Saxony also other opponents of the
Frankfort Recess were invited, he foiled the plan by
declining to attend.

#### 273. General Lutheran Council advocated by Flacianists.

To heal the breach and end the public scandal,
Flacius and his adherents fervently advocated the convocation
of a General Lutheran Synod. In 1559 they
published "Supplicatio Quorundam Theologorum ... pro
Libera Christiana et Legitima Synodo, Supplication of
Some Theologians ... for a Free, Christian and Lawful
Synod." The document was signed by 51 superintendents,
professors, and pastors,"who after Luther's death,"
as they emphasized,"had contended orally and in writing
against the corruptions and sects." The signatures
represented theologians from Ducal Saxony,Hamburg,
Bremen, Luebeck, Rostock, Wismar, Brunswick,
Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Koethen, Nordhausen,
Schweinfurt, Regensburg, Lindau, Upper Palatinate,
Hesse, Brandenburg, Electoral Saxony, Nuernberg,
Augsburg, Baden, etc. Some of the first were: Amsdorf,
Musaeus, Joachim Moerlin, Hesshusius, Max Moerlin,
Gallus, Wigand, Judex, Westphal, John Freder of
Wismar, Anton Otto of Nordhausen, Flacius. The
Supplication showed why a General Synod was necessary
and how it was to be conducted. Its chief object, the
Supplication said, would be to pass on adiaphorism,
Majorism, and synergism, all participants in the Synod
having previously been pledged on the Augsburg
Confession, the Apology, and the Smalcald Articles,
according to which all questions were to be decided.
(Preger 2, 86f.)

The most violent opponent of this plan was
Melanchthon. Fearing that the Flacianists might get
control of the prospective general council, he, in
advance, denounced and branded it as a "Robber Synod
(Raeubersynode), advocated by the ignorant Flacian
rabble." Three weeks before his death, March 28, 1560
he wrote: "Since they [the Flacians] cannot kill me, the
object of these hypocrites is to expel me. For long ago
they have said that they would not leave a foot of
ground for me in Germany.Hoc agunt isti hypocritae, ut
me pellant, cum sanguinem meum haurire non possint; et
quidem oratio istorum vetus est, qua dixerunt, se mihi
non relicturos esse in Germania vestigium pedis." (C. R. 9,
1079.) Philip of Hesse consented to attend the general
synod with the proviso that the power of the Jena theologians
be curbed and also the Swiss be admitted.
(Preger 2, 93.) That the plan of the Flacianists failed was
chiefly due to Elector August, who declined to attend
the synod.

#### 274. Futile Efforts of Princes at Naumburg.

In lieu of the General Lutheran Council advocated
by the Flacians, Christopher of Wuerttemberg, in
March, 1559, recommended as the best means to heal
the breach a convention of all the Lutheran princes and
estates to be held at Naumburg, deliberations to begin
January 20, 1561. The object of this assembly, he said,
was neither to discuss the differences among the
Lutherans, nor to formulate any condemnations, but
only to renew the subscription to the Augsburg
Confession and to consider how the Lutherans might
present a united front and a unanimous confession at
the next diet and at the prospective papal council. All
finally consented to attend, including Duke John
Frederick, Elector August (who, instigated by
Melanchthon, first had declined participation), and the
Crypto-Calvinist, Elector Frederick of the Palatinate.
Expecting no results favorable to genuine Lutheranism
from this assembly, the Jena theologians renewed their
request for a general synod and sent their Supplication
to Naumburg with an additional writing, dated January
23, 1561, in which they admonished the princes not to
enter into an ungodly and unionistic agreement, rather
to eliminate the errors of Major, Osiander, etc. But the
princes, whose object was to settle matters without the
theologians, declined to consider their petition, and, on
February 8, the last day of the convention, returned the
documents to their authors in Jena.

After comparing the various editions of the
Augsburg Confession, the Naumburg Assembly decided
to subscribe to the Confession as delivered 1530 in
Augsburg and published 1531 in German and Latin at
Wittenberg. But when, in the interest of Calvinism,
whither he at that time already was openly tending,
Elector Frederick, supported by Elector August,
demanded that the edition of 1540 be recognized as the
correct explanation of the original Augustana, the
majority of the princes yielded, and, as a result, the
Variata of 1540 alone was mentioned in the Preface
(Praefatio), in which the princes stated the reasons for
renewing their subscription to the Augsburg Confession
at Naumburg. This Preface, prepared by Elector
Frederick and the Wittenberg Crypto-Calvinist Cracow,
also asserted that hitherto no doctrinal corruptions or
deviations from the Augsburg Confession had been tolerated
among the Lutherans. It mentioned neither the
controversies within the Lutheran Church nor the
Smalcald Articles. Evidently, to subscribe to this Preface
was impossible for genuine Lutherans. Duke John
Frederick was told by his theologians Moerlin and
Stoessel that, if he signed it, they would resign and leave.
The duke replied that he, too, would mount his horse
and depart rather than put his signature to a document
in which the errors introduced by the Philippists, etc.,
were not rejected.Ulrich ofMecklenburg took the same
stand. And failing in his efforts to have the Preface
changed in accordance with his convictions, the Duke
entered his protest and left Naumburg without any further
conference with the princes. When hereupon the
latter sent messengers to Weimar, John Frederick
remained firm. As conditions of his subscription the
Duke demanded that in the Preface the apostasy during
the Interim be confessed, the distinctive features of the
Lutheran doctrine concerning the Lord's Supper be
brought out clearly, the recognition of the Variata of
1540 as a doctrinal norm be eliminated, and the
Smalcald Articles be recognized with the rest of the
Lutheran symbols. Unwilling to accede to these
demands, the princes closed the discussions at
Naumburg without the Duke,--hence also without
having attained their goal: peace among the Lutherans.

The Preface containing the objectionable features
was signed by the Electors of the Palatinate, Saxony, and
Brandenburg, by Christopher of Wuerttemberg, Philip
of Hesse, Carl of Baden, and quite a number of other
princes and cities. However, Duke John Frederick did
not by any means stand alone in his opposition to the
ambiguous, unionistic Naumburg document. He was
supported by Ulrich of Mecklenburg (who also left
Naumburg before the close of the convention), Ernest
and Philip of Brunswick, Albrecht of Mecklenburg,
Adolf of Holstein, Francis of Saxon-Lauenburg, the
counts of Schwartzburg,Mansfeld, Stolberg, Barby, and
a number of other princes and cities, among the latter
Regensburg, Augsburg, Strassburg, Nuernberg and
Windsheim. Besides, the loyal Lutherans were represented
also in the territories of almost all the princes
who had signed the Preface. Margrave John of
Brandenburg emphatically declared his dissatisfaction
with the subscription of his delegate at Naumburg.
Before long also August of Saxony, Wolfgang of the
Palatinate, Christopher of Wuerttemberg, and Joachim
of Brandenburg signified their willingness to alter the
Preface in accordance with the views and wishes of John
Frederick, especially regarding the doctrine of, the
Lord's Supper. Indeed, the princes declared that from
the beginning they had understood the Preface in the
strict Lutheran sense. In the Preface of the Book of
Concord signed by the Lutheran princes,we read:"Now,
our conferences and those of our illustrious predecessors,
which were undertaken with a godly and sincere
intention, first at Frankfort-on-the-Main and afterwards
at Naumburg, and were recorded in writing, not
only did not accomplish that end and peaceful settlement
which was desired, but from them even a defense
for errors and false doctrines was sought by some, while
it had never entered our mind, by this writing of ours,
either to introduce, furnish a cover for, and establish any
false doctrine, or in the least even to recede from the
Confession presented in the year 1530 at Augsburg, but
rather, as many of us as participated in the transactions
at Naumburg, wholly reserved it to ourselves, and
promised besides that if in the course of time, anything
would be desired with respect to the Augsburg
Confession, or as often as necessity would seem to
demand it, we would further declare all things thoroughly
and at length." (CONC. TRIGL. 15.) Even Philip of
Hesse finally consented to the changes demanded by
Duke John Frederick. Elector Frederick of the
Palatinate, however, who had misled and, as it were,
hypnotized the Lutheran princes at Naumburg, openly
embraced the Reformed confession and expelled all
consistent Lutherans. For the cause of Lutheranism the
loss of the Palatinate proved a great gain internally, and
helped to pave the way for true unity and the formulation
and adoption of the Formula of Concord.And more
than any other individual it was Flacius who had helped
to bring about this result. (Preger 2, 102.)

#### 275. Andreae and Chemnitz.

The theologians who were first in adopting effective
methods and measures to satisfy the general yearning
for a real peace in the divine truth were Jacob
Andreae and Martin Chemnitz.Andreae was born 1528
in Weiblingen, Wuerttemberg. He studied at Stuttgart
and Tuebingen. In 1546 he became pastor in Stuttgart,
where, two years later, he was deposed because of his
refusal to consent to the lnterim. In 1549 he became
pastor and later on superintendent in Tuebingen. Since
1562 he was also professor and chancellor of the university.
He died 1590.Andreae has been called "the spiritual
heir of John Brenz."Hoping against hope, he incessantly
labored for the unity and peace of the Lutheran
Church. Being a man of great energy and diplomatic
skill, he served her at numerous occasions and in various
capacities. In his pacification efforts he made more
than 120 journeys, visiting nearly all evangelical courts,
cities, and universities in Northern and Southern
Germany. With the consent of the Duke of
Wuerttemberg, Andreae entered the service of Elector
August, April 9, 1567, and lived with his family in
Saxony till his dismissal in December, 1580.Here he was
engaged in directing the affairs of the churches and universities,
and in promoting the work of Lutheran pacification
and concord at large. During his efforts to unite
the Lutherans he was maligned by the Philippists, and
severely criticized also by the strict Lutherans. The latter
was largely due to the fact that in his first attempts at
pacification he allowed himself to be duped by the
Wittenberg Philippists, being even blind enough to
defend them against the charges of Calvinism in the
doctrine of the Lord's Supper made by their opponents
in Jena and in Lower Saxony.While thus Andreae was
the able and enthusiastic promoter of the pacification
which culminated in the adoption of the Formula of
Concord, he lacked the theological insight, acumen, and
consistency which characterized Martin Chemnitz.

Martin Chemnitz was born November 9, 1522, at
Treuenbritzen in Brandenburg. As a boy he attended,
for a brief period, the school in Wittenberg, where he
"rejoiced to see the renowned men of whom he had
heard so much at home, and to hear Luther preach."
From 1539 to 1542 he attended the Gymnasium at
Magdeburg; from 1543 to 1545 he studied in Frankforton-
the-Oder; in 1545 he went to Wittenberg, where
Melanchthon directed his studies. In 1548 he became
rector of the school in Koenigsberg, and 1550 librarian
of Duke Albrecht,with a good salary.Owing to his participation
in the Osiandrian controversy, Chemnitz lost
the favor of Albrecht, and in 1553 he removed to
Wittenberg. On June 9, 1554, he began his lectures on
Melanchthon's Loci Communes before a large and
enthusiastic audience,Melanchthon himself being one
of his hearers. In November, 1554, he accepted a position
as pastor, and in 1567 as superintendent, in the city
of Brunswick.He died April 8, 1586. Chemnitz was the
prince of the Lutheran divines of his age and, next to
Luther, the greatest theologian of our Church.Referring
to Luther and Chemnitz, the Romanists said: "You
Lutherans have two Martins; if the second had not
appeared, the first would have disappeared (si posterior
non fuisset, prior non stetisset)."Besides the two Lutheran
classics: Examen Concilii Tridentini, published 1565--
1573, and De Duabus Naturis in Christo, 1570,
Chemnitz wrote, among other books: Harmonia
Evangelica, continued and published 1593 by Leyser
and completed by John Gerhard, and Foundations (Die
Fundamente) of the Sound Doctrine concerning the
Substantial Presence, Tendering, and Eating and
Drinking of the Body and Blood of the Lord in the Supper,
1569.

Andreae and Chemnitz became acquainted with
each other in 1568,when Duke Julius invited the former
to conduct the visitation in Brunswick together with
Chemnitz. They jointly also composed the Brunswick
Church Order of 1569, which was preceded by the
Corpus Doctrinae lulium, compiled by Chemnitz and
containing the Augsburg Confession, the Apology the
Smalcald Articles, the Catechisms of Luther, and a "short
[rather long], simple, and necessary treatise on the
prevalent corruptions." Andreae and Chemnitz are the
theologians to whom more than any other two men our
Church owes the Formula of Concord and the unification
of our Church in the one true Christian faith as
taught by Luther. However, it is Chemnitz who, more
than Andreae or any other theologian,must be credited
with the theological clarity and the correctness which
characterizes the Formula.

#### 276. First Peace Efforts of Andreae Fail.

In his first attempts to unify the Lutheran Church,
Andreae endeavored to reconcile all parties, including
the Wittenberg Philippists, who then were contemplating
an agreement with the Calvinists. In 1567, at the
instance of Landgrave William of Hesse-Cassel and
Duke Christopher of Wuerttemberg, Andreae composed
his "Confession and Brief Explanation of Several
Controverted Articles, according to which a Christian
unity might be effected in the churches adhering to the
Augsburg Confession, and the offensive and wearisome
dissension might be settled."In five articles he treated: 1.
Justification, 2. Good Works, 3. Free Will, 4. The
Adiaphora, 5. The Lord's Supper. The second article
maintains that we are neither justified nor saved by
good works, since Christ has earned for us both salvation
and righteousness by His innocent obedience, suffering,
and death alone, which is imputed as righteousness
to all believers solely by faith. It rejects all those who
teach otherwise, but not directly and expressly the statement
:Good works are necessary to salvation.The third
article maintains that, also after the Fall, man is not a
block, but a rational creature having a free, though
weak,will in external things; but that in divine and spiritual
matters his intellect is utterly blind and his will is
dead; and that hence, unless God creates a new volition
in him, man is unable of himself, of his own powers, to
accept the grace of God offered in Christ. It rejects all
who teach otherwise. The fourth article states that ceremonies
are no longer free, but must be abandoned,
when their adoption is connected with a denial of the
Christian religion, doctrine, and confession. It rejects all
those who teach otherwise. The fifth article emphasizes
that also the wicked when they partake of the Lord's
Supper, receive the body of Christ, but to their damnation.
It furthermore declares: Since it is objected that the
body and blood cannot be present in the Holy Supper
because Christ ascended to heaven with His body, it is
necessary "to explain the article of the incarnation of the
Son of God, and to indicate, in as simple a way as possible,
the manner in which both natures, divine and
human, are united in Christ, wherefrom it appears to
what height the human nature in Christ has been exalted
by the personal union." (Hutter, Concordia Concors,
110ff.)

In 1568, at the Brunswick Visitation, referred to
above, Andreae submitted, his five articles to Duke
Julius, and succeeded in winning him for his plan. In the
same interest he came to Wittenberg, January 9, 1569.
Furnished with letters of commendation from Duke
Julius and Landgrave William of Hesse, he obtained an
interview also with Elector August, who referred him to
his theologians. On August 18, 1569, Andreae held a
conference with the Wittenbergers. They insisted that
the basis of the contemplated agreement must be the
Corpus Misnicum (Philippicum).When Andreae, unsophisticated
as he still was with respect to the real character
of Philippism, publicly declared that the
Wittenbergers were orthodox teachers, and that the
Corpus Misnicum contained no false doctrine he was
supplied with a testimonial in which the Wittenbergers
refer to their Corpus, but not to Andreae's articles, to
which also they had not fully consented. The result was
that the Jena theologians, in particular Tilemann
Hesshusius, denounced Andreae's efforts as a unionistic
scheme and a betrayal of true Lutheranism in the interest
of Crypto-Calvinism. They rejected Andreae's articles
because they were incomplete, and contained no
specific rejection of the errors of the Philippists.

At the instance of Andreae, May 7, 1570, a conference
met at Zerbst in Anhalt, at which twenty theologians
represented Electoral Saxony, Brunswick, Hesse,
Brandenburg, Anhalt, and Lower Saxony (the Ducal
Saxon theologians declining to participate). The conference
decided that a new confession was not needed, and
unanimously recognized the Augsburg Confession, its
Apology, the Smalcald Articles, and the Catechisms of
Luther. Andreae was elated. In his "Report" to the
Emperor and the princes he gloried in "the Christian
unity" attained at Zerbst. But also this apparent victory
for peace and true Lutheranism was illusory rather than
real, for the Wittenberg theologians qualified their subscription
by formally declaring that they interpreted
and received the confessions enumerated only in as far
as they agreed with the Corpus Philippicum.And before
long the Crypto-Calvinistic publications, referred to in
the chapter on the Crypto-Calvinistic Controversy,
began to make their appearance. The only result of
these first peace efforts of Andreae, which lacked in single-
minded devotion to the truth, and did not sufficiently
exclude every form of indifferentism and unionism,
was that he himself was regarded with increasing
suspicion by the opponents of the Philippists. As for
Andreae, however, the dealings which he had with the
dishonest Wittenbergers opened his eyes and convinced
him that it was impossible to win Electoral Saxony for a
truly Lutheran union as long as the Crypto-Calvinists
were firmly seated in the saddle.

#### 277. Andreae's Sermons and the Swabian Concordia.

Abandoning his original scheme, which had merely
served to increase the animosity among the
Lutherans and to discredit himself, Andreae resolved
henceforth to confine his peace efforts to true
Lutherans, especially those of Swabia and Lower
Saxony, and to unite them in opposition to the
Zwinglians, Calvinists, and Philippists, who, outside of
Electoral Saxony,were by this time generally regarded as
traitors to the cause of Lutheranism. In 1573 he made
his first move to carry out this new plan of his by publishing
sermons which he had delivered 1572 on the
doctrines controverted within the Lutheran Church.
The title ran:"Six Christian Sermons concerning the dissensions
which from the year 1548 to this 1573d year
have gradually arisen among the theologians of the
Augsburg Confession, as to what attitude a plain pastor
and a common Christian layman who may have been
offended thereby should assume toward them according
to his Catechism." These sermons treat of justification,
good works, original sin, free will, the adiaphora,
Law and Gospel, and the person of Christ. As the title
indicates,Andreae appealed not so much to the theologians
as to the pastors and the people of the Lutheran
Church, concerning whom he was convinced that,
adhering as they did, to Luther's Catechism, they in reality,
at least in their hearts, were even then, and always
had been, agreed. Andreae sent these sermons to
Chemnitz, Chytraeus, Hesshusius, Wigand, and other
theologians with the request that they be accepted as a
basis of agreement. In the preface, dated February 17,
1573, he dedicated them to Duke Julius of Brunswick
whose good will and consent in the matter he had won
in 1568, when he assisted in introducing the
Reformation in his territories. Before this Nicholas
Selneccer, then superintendent of Wolfenbuettel, in
order to cultivate the friendly relations between Swabia
and Lower Saxony, had dedicated his Instruction in the
Christian Religion (Institutio Religionis Christianae) to
the Duke of Wuerttemberg, praising the writings of
Brenz, and lauding the services rendered by Andreae to
the duchy of Brunswick.

The sermons of Andreae were welcomed by
Chemnitz,Westphal in Hamburg, David Chytraeus in
Rostock, and others. They also endeavored to obtain
recognition for them from various ecclesiastical ministries
of Lower Saxony. But having convinced themselves
that the sermonic form was not adapted for a
confession, they, led by Chemnitz, advised that their
contents he reduced to articles in "thesis and antithesis,"
and that this be done "with the assistance of other theologians."
Andreae immediately acted on this suggestion
and the result was what is known as the Swabian
Concordia (Schwaebische Konkordie)--the first draft of
the Formula of Concord. This document, also called the
Tuebingen Book, was submitted to, and approved by,
the theologians of Tuebingen and by the Stuttgart
Consistory. In substance it was an elaboration of the Six
Sermonswith the addition of the last two articles. It contains
eleven articles, treating 1.Original Sin; 2. Free Will;
3. The Righteousness of Faith before God; 4. Good
Works; 5. Law and Gospel; 6.The Third Use of the Law;
7. The Church Usages Called Adiaphora; 8. The Lord's
Supper; 9.The Person of Christ: 10.Eternal Election; 11.
Other Factions and Sects. In the introduction Andreae
also emphasizes the necessity of adopting those symbols
which were afterwards received into the Book of
Concord.

#### 278. The Swabian-Saxon Concordia.

On March 22, 1574, Andreae sent the Swabian
Concordia to Duke Julius and Chemnitz with the
request to examine it and to have it discussed in the
churches of Lower Saxony. On the twelfth of May the
Duke ordered Chemnitz to prepare an opinion on the
book and to present it to the clergy for their examination
and approval. Under the leadership of Chemnitz
numerous conferences were held, and the various criticisms
offered led to a revision of the document. This
work was begun in April, 1575, by the theological faculty
of Rostock.Apart from numerous changes and additions
everywhere, the articles on Free Will and on the
Lord's Supper were completely remodeled by Chytraeus
and Chemnitz.

The new confession, known as the Swabian-
[Lower] Saxon Concordia, was subscribed by the theologians
and pastors of the duchies of Brunswick,
Mecklenburg, Mansfeld, Hoya, and Oldenburg. It
acknowledges as its doctrinal basis the Holy Scriptures,
the three Ecumenical Creeds, the Augsburg Confession,
its Apology, the Smalcald Articles, and Luther's two
Catechisms. It discusses the following articles in the following
order: 1. Of Original Sin; 2. Of the Person of
Christ; 3. Of the Righteousness of Faith before God; 4.
Of Good Works, 5. Of the Law and the Gospel; 6.Of the
Third Use of the Law of God; 7. Of the Holy Supper; 8.
Of God's Eternal Providence and Election; 9.Of Church
Usages which are Called Adiaphora or Things
Indifferent; 10. Of Free Will or Human Powers; 11. Of
Other Factions and Sects which have Never
Acknowledged the Augsburg Confession.

While this new Concordia was adopted in Lower
Saxony, the Swabians, to whom it was forwarded,
September 5, 1575, were not quite satisfied with its
form, but did not object to its doctrinal contents. They
criticized the unevenness of its style, its frequent use of
Latin technical terms, its quotations (now approved,
now rejected) from Melanchthon, etc. Particularly
regarding the last mentioned point they feared that the
references to Melanchthon might lead to new dissensions;
hence they preferred that citations be taken from
Luther's writings only, which was done in the Formula
of Concord as finally adopted.

#### 279. The Maulbronn Formula.

The movement for a general unity within the
Lutheran Church received a powerful impetus by the
sudden and ignominious collapse of Crypto-Calvinism
in Electoral Saxony, 1574.By unmasking the Philippists,
God had removed the chief obstacle of a godly and general
peace among the Lutherans.Now the clouds of dissension
began to disappear rapidly. As long as the eyes
of Elector August were closed to the dishonesty of his
theologians, there was no hope for a peace embracing
the entire Lutheran Church in Germany. Even before
the public exposure of the Philippists,August had been
told as much by Count Henneberg and other princes,
viz., that the Wittenberg theologians were universally
suspected, and that peace could not be established until
their Calvinistic errors had been condemned. For in the
doctrines of the Lord's Supper and of the person of
Christ, as has been shown in the chapter on the Crypto-
Calvinistic Controversy, the Philippists of Electoral
Saxony and of other sections of Germany were
Calvinists rather than Lutherans. It was the appearance
of the Calvinistic Exegesis Perspicua of 1574 which left
no doubt in the mind of the Elector that for years he
had been surrounded by a clique of dishonest theologians
and unscrupulous schemers, who, though claim-
ing to be Lutherans,were secret adherents of Calvinism.
And after the Elector, as Chemnitz remarks, had discovered
the deception of his theologians in the article on
the Lord's Supper, he began to doubt their entire contention.
(Richard, 426.)

Among Lutherans generally the humiliating events
in Saxony increased the feeling of shame at the conditions
prevailing within their Church as well as the
earnest desire for a genuine and lasting peace in the old
Lutheran truths.And now Elector August, who, despite
his continued animosity against Flacius, always wished
to be a true Lutheran, but up to 1574 had not realized
that the Philippistic type of doctrine dominant in his
country departed from Luther's teaching, was determined
to satisfy this universal longing for unity and
peace. Immediately after the unmasking of the
Philippists he took measures to secure the restoration of
orthodox Lutheranism in his own lands. At the same
time he placed himself at the head of the larger movement
for the establishment of religious peace among
the Lutherans generally by the elaboration and adoption
of a doctrinal formula settling the pending controversies.
To restore unity and peace to the Lutheran
Church, which his own theologians had done so much
to disturb, was now his uppermost desire.He prosecuted
the plan of pacification with great zeal and perseverance.
He also paid the heavy expenses (80,000 gulden),
incurred by the numerous conventions, etc.And when,
in the interest of such peace and unity, the theologians
were engaged in conferences the pious Elector and his
wife were on their knees, asking God that He would
crown their labor with success.

The specific plan of the Elector was as appears from
his rescript of November 21, 1575, to his counselors,
that pacific theologians, appointed by the various
Lutheran princes "meet in order to deliberate how, by
the grace of God, all [the existing various corpora doctrinae]
might be reduced to one corpus which we all
could adopt, and that this book or corpus doctrinae be
printed anew and the ministers in the lands of each
ruler be required to be guided thereby." Before this
Elector August had requested Count George Ernest of
Henneberg to take the initiative in the matter.
Accordingly, in November, 1575 Henneberg, Duke
Ludwig of Wuerttemberg and Margrave Carl of Baden
agreed to ask a number of theologians to give their
opinion concerning the question as to how a document
might be prepared which would serve as a beginning to
bring about true Christian concord among the churches
of the Augsburg Confession.The theologians appointed
were the Wuerttemberg court-preacher Lucas
Osiander (born 1534; died 1604), the Stuttgart provost
Balthasar Bidembach (born 1533; died 1578) and several
theologians of Henneberg and Baden. Their opinion,
delivered November 14 1575, was approved by the
princes, and Osiander and Bidembach were ordered to
prepare a formula of agreement in accordance with it.
The document which they submitted was discussed
with theologians from Henneberg and Baden at
Cloister Maulbronn, Wuerttemberg and subscribed
January 19, 1576.

The Maulbronn Formula, as the document was
called, differs from the Swabian-Saxon Concordia in
being much briefer (about half as voluminous), in
avoiding technical Latin terms, in making no reference
whatever to Melanchthon, in quoting from Luther's
works only, and in omitting such doctrinal points
(Anabaptism, Schwenckfeldianism, Antitrinitarianism,
etc.) as had not been controverted among the
Lutherans. Following the order of the Augustana, this
Formula treats the following articles. 1. Of Original Sin;
2. Of the Person of Christ; 3. Of Justification of Faith 4.
Of the Law and Gospel; 5. Of Good Works 6. Of the
Holy Supper of Our Lord Christ 7. Of Church Usages,
Called Adiaphora or Things Indifferent, 8. Of Free Will;
9. Of the Third Use of God's Law.

#### 280. The Torgau Book.

On February 9, 1576, the Maulbronn Formula,
approved by Count Ludwig of Wuerttemberg,
Margrave Carl of Baden, and Count George Ernest of
Henneberg, was transmitted to Elector August,who had
already received a copy of the Swabian-Saxon
Concordia from Duke Julius of Brunswick. The Elector
submitted both to Andreae for an opinion, whom formal
reasons induced to decide in favor of the
Maulbronn Formula.At the same time Andreae advised
the Elector to arrange a general conference of prominent
theologians to act and decide in this matter, suggesting
as two of its members Chemnitz and Chytraeus
of Rostock. This being in agreement with his own plans,
the Elector, at the convention at Lichtenberg, February
15, 1576 submitted the suggestions of Andreae to twelve
of his own theologians, headed by Nicholas Selneccer,
then professor in Leipzig. [Selneccer was born
December 6, 1530. In 1550 he took up his studies in
Wittenberg, where he was much impressed and influenced
by Melanchthon. In 1557 he was appointed
court-preacher in Dresden. Beginning with 1565 after
the banishment of Flacius and his colleagues, he was
professor in Jena. He returned to Leipzig in 1568. In
1570 he accepted a call from Duke Julius as court-
preacher and superintendent in Brunswick, but
returned to Leipzig in 1574. Before the unmasking of
the Crypto-Calvinists his theological attitude lacked
clearness and determination.Ever after,however, he was
the leader of the Lutheran forces in Electoral Saxony.At
the Lichtenberg Convention, convoked February 16,
1576, by Elector August, Selneccer successfully advocated
the removal of the Wittenberg Catechism, the
Consensus Dresdensis, and the Corpus Philippicum. In
their place he recommended the adoption of a new corpus
doctrinae containing the three Ecumenical Creeds,
the Unaltered Augsburg Confession, the Apology, the
Smalcald Articles, the Catechisms of Luther, and, if
desired, Luther's Commentary on Galatians. Finally he
advised that the electors and princes arrange a convention
of such representative theologians as, e.g.,
Chytraeus, Chemnitz, Andreae, and Marbach, to discuss
the doctrinal differences. Selneccer's recommendations
were adopted by the convention and transmitted
to Elector August.Though contributing little to the contents
of the Formula of Concord, Selneccer heartily
cooperated in its preparation, revision, and adoption. In
1580, of his own accord, he published the Latin Book of
Concord, which was followed in 1584 by an edition
authorized by the princes. Selneccer also participated in
preparing the Apology of the Book of Concord, first published
1582 in Magdeburg. In May, 1589, after the
Crypto-Calvinistic reaction under Christian I,
Selneccer, whom the Calvinists hated more than others
of the theologians who had participated in the promulgation
of the Formula of Concord, was deposed,
harassed, and reduced to poverty because of his testimony
against Chancellor Crell and his earnest and continued
warnings against the Calvinists. After the death
of Christian I, Selneccer was recalled to Leipzig, where
he arrived May 19, 1592, five days before his death,May
24, 1592.]

Having through the influence of Selneccer, at
Lichtenberg, obtained the consent of his clergy to his
plans of unification, and, also in accordance with their
desire, called Andreae to Saxony, Elector August immediately
made arrangements for the contemplated general
convention of theologians. It was held at Torgau, from
May 28 to June 7, 1576, and attended by Selneccer, the
Saxon ministers who had participated in the
Lichtenberg convention, Andreae, Chemnitz, Andrew
Musculus [General Superintendent of Brandenburg],
Christopher Cornerus [professor in Frankfurt-on-the-
Oder; born 1518; died {{< hiddenanchor 1549 >}}1549{{< /hiddenanchor >}}, and David Chytraeus
[born February 26, 1530, in Wuerttemberg; awarded
degree of magister in Tuebingen when only fourteen
years old; began his studies 1544 in Wittenberg, where
he also heard Luther; was professor in Rostock from
1551 till his death, June 25, {{< hiddenanchor 1600 >}}1600{{< /hiddenanchor >}}. The result of the
Torgau deliberations, in which much time was spent on
the articles of Original Sin and Free Will, was the socalled
Torgau Book. On the seventh of June the theologians
informed the Elector that, on the basis of the
Swabian-Saxon and the Maulbronn documents, they, as
desired by him, had agreed on a corpus doctrinae.

The Torgau Book was essentially the Swabian-Saxon
Concordia, recast and revised, as urged by Andreae,with
special reference to the desirable features (enumerated
above) of the Maulbronn Formula. The majority decided,
says Chemnitz, that the Saxon Concordia should be
retained, but in such a manner as to incorporate also the
quotations from Luther, and whatever else might be
regarded as useful in the Maulbronn Formula. The
Torgau Book contained the twelve articles of the later
Formula of Concord and in the same sequence, Article
IX,"Of the Descent of Christ into Hell,"had been added
at Torgau. The Book was entitled: "Opinion as to how
the dissensions prevailing among the theologians of the
Augsburg Confession may, according to the Word of
God, be agreed upon and settled in a Christian manner."
It was signed as "their faith, doctrine, and confession"
by the six men who were chiefly responsible for its
form and contents: Jacob. Andreae, Martin Chemnitz,
Nicholas Selneccer, David Chytraeus, Andrew
Musculus, and Christopher Cornerus. The convention
was closed with a service of thanksgiving to Almighty
God for the blessed results of their labors and the happy
termination and favorable issue of their discussions,
Selneccer delivering the sermon. Similar services were
held at other places, notably in Mecklenburg and Lower
Saxony.

In a letter to Hesshusius, Chemnitz says concerning
the Torgau Convention:"Everything in this entire transaction
occurred aside from, beyond, above, and contrary
to the hope, expectation, and thought of all. I was
utterly astounded, and could scarcely believe that these
things were done when they were done. It seemed like a
dream to me. Certainly a good happy and desired
beginning has been made toward the restoration of
purity of doctrine, toward the elimination of corruptions,
toward the establishment of a godly confession."
In a letter of July 24, 1576, to Hesshusius and Wigand,
Andreae wrote in a similar vein, saying: "Often were
they [Chemnitz and Chytraeus] almost overwhelmed
with rejoicing and wonder that we were there [at
Torgau] brought to such deliberation. Truly, this is the
change of the right hand of the Most High,which ought
also to remind us that since the truth no longer suffers,
we should do everything that may contribute to the
restoration of good feeling." (Richard, 428. 430.)

#### 281. The Bergic Book or the Formula of Concord.

In accordance with the recommendation of the
Torgau convention the Elector of Saxony examined the
Torgau Book himself and had copies of it sent to the various
Lutheran princes and estates in Germany with the
request to have it tested by their theologians, and to
return their opinions and censures to Dresden.Of these
(about 25) the majority were favorable. The churches in
Pomerania and Holstein desired that Melanchthon's
authority be recognized alongside of Luther's. On the
other hand, Hesshusius and Wigand demanded that
Flacius, Osiander,Major,Melanchthon, and other "originators
and patrons of corruptions" be referred to by
name and condemned as errorists. Quite a number of
theologians objected to the Torgau Book because it was
too bulky. To meet this objection the Epitome, a summary
of the contents of the Torgau Book, was prepared
by Andreae with the consent of the Elector. Originally
its title read: "Brief Summary of the articles which, controverted
among the theologians of the Augsburg
Confession for many years, were settled in a Christian
manner at Torgau in the month of June, 1576, by the
theologians which there met and subscribed."

After most of the censures had arrived, the "triumvirate"
of the Formula of Concord (as Chytraeus
called them 1581), Andreae, Selneccer, and Chemnitz,
by order of the Elector met on March 1, 1577, at Cloister
Bergen, near Magdeburg, for the consideration of the
criticisms and final editing of the new confession. They
finished their work on March 14. Later when other criticisms
arrived and a further revision took place (also at
Bergen, in May 1577), Musculus, Cornerus, and
Chytraeus were added to their number. Though
numerous changes, additions, and omissions were
made at Bergen, and in Article IX the present form was
substituted for the sermon of Luther, the doctrinal substance
of the Torgau Book remained unchanged. The
chief object of the revisers was to eliminate misunderstandings
and to replace ambiguous and dark terms
with clear ones.At the last meeting of the six revisers (at
Bergen, in May) the Solid Declaration was quickly and
finally agreed upon, only a few changes of a purely verbal
and formal nature being made. On May 28, 1577,
the revised form of the Torgau Book was submitted to
Elector August. It is known as the Bergic Book, or the
Solid Declaration, or the Formula of Concord, also as the
Book of Concord (a title which was afterwards reserved
for the collection of all the Lutheran symbols). Of
course, the Epitome, prepared by Andreae, was also
examined and approved by the revisers at Cloister
Bergen.

In order to remove a number of misunderstandings
appearing after the completion of the Bergic Book,
a "Preface" (Introduction to the Book of Concord) was
prepared by the theologians and signed by the princes.
The Catalog of Testimonies, added first with the caption
"Appendix" and later without the same, or omitted
entirely, is a private work ofAndreae and Chemnitz,and
not a part of the confession. Its special purpose is to
prove that the Lutheran doctrine concerning the person
of Christ and the majesty of His human nature as set
forth in Article VII of the Formula of Concord, is clearly
taught by the Scriptures as well as by the Fathers of the
ancient Church.The Formula of Concord (German) was
first published at Dresden, 1580, as a part of the Book of
Concord. The first authentic Latin edition appeared in
Leipzig, 1584. (Compare chapter on "The Book of
Concord.")

#### 282. Subscription to the Formula of Concord.

Originally Elector August planned to submit the
Bergic Book to a general convention of the evangelical
estates for approval. But fearing that this might lead to
new discussions and dissensions, the six theologians, in
their report (May 28, 1577) on the final revision of the
Bergic Book, submitted and recommended a plan of
immediate subscription instead of an adoption at a general
convention. Consenting to their views, the Electors
of Saxony and Brandenburg forthwith sent copies of the
Bergic Book to such princes and estates as were expected
to consent. These were requested to multiply the
copies, and everywhere to circulate and submit them for
discussion and subscription. As a result the Formula of
Concord was signed by the electors of Saxony, of
Brandenburg, and of the Palatinate; furthermore by 20
dukes and princes, 24 counts, 4 barons, 35 imperial
cities, and about 8,000 pastors and teachers embracing
about two-thirds of the Lutheran territories of
Germany.

The first signatures were those of Andreae
Selneccer, Musculus, Cornerus, Chytraeus, and
Chemnitz, who on May 29, 1577, signed both the
Epitome and the Thorough Declaration the latter with
the following solemn protestation: "Since now, in the
sight of God and of all Christendom, we wish to testify
to those now living and those who shall come after us
that this declaration herewith presented concerning all
the controverted articles aforementioned and
explained, and no other, is our faith, doctrine, and confession,
in which we are also willing, by God's grace, to
appear with intrepid hearts before the judgment-seat of
Jesus Christ, and give an account of it and that we will
neither privately nor publicly speak or write anything
contrary to it but, by the help of God's grace, intend to
abide thereby: therefore, after mature deliberation we
have, in God's fear and with the invocation ofHis name,
attached our signatures with our own hands." (1103, 40
CONC. TRIGL.1103, 40; 842, 31.)

Kolde remarks:"Wherever the civil authorities were
in favor of the Bergic Book, the pastors and teachers also
were won for its subscription.That the wish of the ruler
contributed to this result cannot be denied and is confirmed
by the Crypto-Calvinistic troubles reappearing
later on in Saxony. But that the influence of the rulers
must not be overestimated, appears, apart from other
things from the frequent additions to the signatures
With mouth and heart (cum ore et corde).' " Self-evidently
the Crypto-Calvinists as well as other errorists
had to face the alternative of either subscribing or being
suspended from the ministry. The very object of the
Formula of Concord was to purge the Lutheran Church
from Calvinists and others who were not in sympathy
and agreement with the Lutheran Confessions and constituted
a foreign and disturbing element in the
Lutheran Church.

As to the manner in which the Formula was submitted
for subscription, it was certainly not indifferentistic,
but most solemn and serious, and perhaps, in
some instances, even severe. Coercion, however, was
nowhere employed for obtaining the signatures. At any
rate, no instance is recorded in which compulsion was
used to secure its adoption.Moreover, the campaign of
public subscription, for which about two years were
allowed, was everywhere conducted on the principle
that such only were to be admitted to subscription as
had read the Formula and were in complete agreement
with its doctrinal contents.Yet it was probably true that
some, as Hutter assumes, signed with a bad conscience
[Hutter: "Deinde esto: subscripserunt aliqui mala conscientia
Formulae Concordiae;" Mueller, Einleitung, {{< hiddenanchor 115 >}}115{{< /hiddenanchor >}};
for among those who affixed their names are quite a few
of former Crypto-Calvinists--men who had always
found a way of escaping martyrdom, and, also in this
instance, may have preferred the retaining of their livings
to following their conviction. The fact is that no
other confession can be mentioned in the elaboration of
which so much time, labor, and care was expended to
bring out clearly the divine truth, to convince every one
of its complete harmony with the Bible and the
Lutheran symbols, and to hear and meet all objections,
as was the case with respect to the Formula of Concord.
"In reply to the criticism [of the Calvinists in the
Neustadt Admonition, etc.] that it was unjust for only six
theologians to write a Confession for the whole Church,
and that a General Synod should have been held before
the signing of the Confession, the Convention of
Quedlinburg, in 1583, declared it untrue that the
Formula of Concord had been composed by only six
theologians, and reminded the critics how, on the contrary,
the articles had first been sent, a number of times,
to all the Lutheran churches in Germany; how, in order
to consider them, synods and conferences had been
held on every side, and the articles had been thoroughly
tested, how criticisms had been made upon them;
and how the criticisms had been conscientiously taken
in hand by a special commission. The Quedlinburg
Convention therefore declared in its minutes that,
indeed, such a frequent revision and testing of the
Christian Book of Concord, many times repeated, is a
much greater work than if a General Synod had been
assembled respecting it to which every province would
have commissioned two or three theologians, who in
the name of all the rest would have helped to test and
approve the book. For in that way only one synod
would have been held for the comparing and testing of
this work, but, as it was, many synods were held; and it
was sent to many provinces, which had it tested by the
weighty and mature judgment of their theologians, in
such manner as has never occurred in the case of any
book or any matter of religion since the beginning of
Christianity, as is evident from the history of the
Church,' ...We are solemnly told [by Andreae, Selneccer,
etc.] that no one was forced by threats to sign the
Formula of Concord, and that no one was tempted to do
so by promises.We know that no one was taken suddenly
by surprise. Every one was given time to think.As
the work of composition extended through years, so
several years were given for the work of signing.We very
much doubt whether the Lutheran Church to-day
could secure any democratic subscription so clean, so
conscientious, so united, or so large as that which was
given to the Book of Concord." (Schmauk, 663f.)

#### 283. Subscription in Electoral Saxony, Brandenburg, etc.

In Electoral Saxony, where Crypto-Calvinism had
reigned supreme for many years, prevailing conditions
naturally called for a strict procedure. For Calvinists
could certainly not be tolerated as preachers in
Lutheran churches or as teachers in Lutheran schools.
Such was also the settled conviction and determination
of Elector August.When he learned that the Wittenberg
professors were trying to evade an unqualified subscription,
he declared: By the help of God I am determined,
as long as I live to keep my churches and schools
pure and in agreement with the Formula of Concord.
Whoever does not want to cooperate with me may go, I
have no desire for him. God protect me, and those
belonging to me, from Papists and Calvinists--I have
experienced it. (Richard 529.)

The Elector demanded that every pastor affix his
own signature to the Formula. Accordingly, in every
place, beginning with Wittenberg, the commissioners
addressed the ministers and schoolteachers, who had
been summoned from the smaller towns and villages,
read the Formula to them, exhorted them to examine it
and to express their doubts or scruples, if they had any,
and finally demanded subscription of all those who
could not bring any charge of false doctrine against it.
According to Planck only one pastor, one superintendent
(Kolditz, who later on subscribed), and one schoolteacher
refused to subscribe. (6, 560.) Several professors
in Leipzig and Wittenberg who declined to acknowledge
the Formula were dismissed.

However, as stated, also in Electoral Saxony coercion
was not employed.Moreover, objections were listened
to with patience, and time was allowed for consideration.
Indeed, in the name of the Elector every one
was admonished not to subscribe against his conscience.
I. F. Mueller says in his Historico-Theological
Introduction to the Lutheran Symbols: "At the Herzberg
Convention, 1578,Andreae felt justified in stating:I can
truthfully say that no one was coerced to subscribe or
banished on that account. If this is not true, the Son of
God has not redeemed me with His blood; for otherwise
I do not want to become a partaker of the blood of
Christ,'Pursuant to this declaration the opponents were
publicly challenged to mention a single person who had
subscribed by compulsion, but they were unable to do
so. Moreover, even the Nuernbergers, who did not
adopt the Formula of Concord, acknowledged that the
signatures had been affixed without employment of
force." (115.) True, October 8, 1578, Andreae wrote to
Chemnitz: "We treated the pastors with such severity
that a certain truly good man and sincere minister of
the church afterwards said to us in the lodging that,
when the matter was proposed so severely, his mind was
seized with a great consternation which caused him to
think that he, being near Mount Sinai, was hearing the
promulgation of the Mosaic Law (se animo adeo consternato
fuisse, cum negotium tam severiter proponeretur,
ut existimaret, se monti Sinai proximum legis Mosaicae
promulgationem audire) ... I do not believe that anywhere
a similar severity has been employed." (116.) But
the term "severity" here employed does not mean force
or compulsion, but merely signifies religious seriousness
and moral determination to eliminate Crypto-
Calvinism from the Lutheran Church in Electoral
Saxony. The spirit in which also Andreae desired this
matter to be conducted appears from his letter of
November 20, 1679, to Count Wolfgang, in which he
says:Although as yet some ministers in his country had
not subscribed to the Formula, he should not make too
much of that, much less press or persuade them; for
whoever did not subscribe spontaneously and with a
good conscience should abstain from subscribing altogether
much rather than pledge himself with word and
hand when his heart did not concurdenn wer es nicht
mit seinem Geist und gutem Gewissen tue, bleibe viel besser
davon, als dass er sich mit Worten und mit der Hand
dazu bekenne und das Herz nicht daran waere. (115.)

Also Selneccer testifies to the general willingness
with which the ministers in Saxony affixed their signatures.
With respect to the universities ofWittenberg and
Leipzig, however, he remarks that there some were
found who, while willing to acknowledge the first part
of the Book of Concord, begged to be excused from
signing the Formula, but that they had been told by the
Elector: If they agreed with the first part, there was no
reason why they should refuse to sign the second, since
it was based on the first. (Carpzov, Isagoge 20.) While
thus in Electoral Saxony subscription to the Formula
was indeed demanded of all professors and ministers,
there is not a single case on record in which compulsion
was employed to obtain it.

In Brandenburg the clergy subscribed unconditionally,
spontaneously, and with thankfulness toward
God and to their "faithful, pious ruler for his fatherly
care of the Church."Nor was any opposition met with
in Wuerttemberg,where the subscription was completed
in October, 1677. In Mecklenburg the ministers were
kindly invited to subscribe. Such as refused were suspended
and given time for deliberation,with the proviso
that they abstain from criticizing the Formula before
the people. When the superintendent of Wismar and
several pastors declined finally to adopt the Formula,
they were deposed.

Accordingly, it was in keeping with the facts when
the Lutheran electors and princes declared in the
Preface to the Formula of Concord "that their theologians,
ministers, and schoolteachers" "did with glad
heart and heartfelt thanks to God the Almighty volun-
tarily and with well-considered courage adopt, approve,
and subscribe this Book of Concord [Formula of
Concord] as the true and Christian sense of the
Augsburg Confession, and did publicly testify thereto
with heart, mouth and hand. Wherefore also this
Christian Agreement is not the confession of some few
of our theologians only, but is called, and is in general,
the unanimous confession of each and every one of the
ministers and schoolteachers of our lands and
provinces." (CONC. TRIGL. 12f.)

#### 284. Where and Why Formula of Concord was Rejected.

Apart from the territories which were really
Calvinistic (Anhalt, Lower Hesse, the Palatinate, etc.),
comparatively few of the German princes and estates
considered adherents of the Augsburg Confession
declined to accept the Formula of Concord because of
any doctrinal disagreement. Some refused to append
their names for political reasons; others, because they
were opposed on principle to a new symbol.With still
others, notably some of the imperial cities, it was a case
of religious particularism, which would not brook any
disturbance of its own mode of church-life. Also injured
pride, for not having been consulted in the matter, nor
called upon to participate in the preparation and revision
of the Formula, was not altogether lacking as a
motive for withholding one's signature. In some
instances personal spite figured as a reason. Because
Andreae had given offense to Paul von Eitzen,Holstein
rejected the Formula, stating that all the articles it treated
were clearly set forth in the existing symbols. Duke
Julius of Brunswick, though at first most zealous in promoting
the work of pacification and the adoption of the
Book of Concord, withdrew in 1583, because Chemnitz
had rebuked him for allowing his son to be consecrated
Bishop of Halberstadt. (Kolde, 73f.) However, despite
the unfriendly attitude of Duke Julius, some of the
Brunswick theologians openly declared their agreement
with the Formula as well as their determination by the
help of God,to adhere to its doctrine.No doubt but that
much more pressure was exercised in hindering than in
urging Lutherans to subscribe to the Formula. For the
reasons enumerated the Formula of Concord was not
adopted in Brunswick,Wolfenbuettel, Holstein, Hesse,
Pomerania (where however, the Formula was received
later), Anhalt, the Palatinate (which, after a short
Lutheran interregnum, readopted the Heidelberg
Catechism under John Casimir, 1583), Zweibruecken,
Nassau, Bentheim, Tecklenburg, Solms, Ortenburg,
Liegnitz, Brieg,

Wohlau, Bremen, Danzig, Magdeburg, Nuernberg,
Weissenburg, Windsheim, Frankfort-on-theBIain,
Worms, Speyer, Strassburg.In Sweden and Denmark,
Frederick II issued an edict, July 24, 1580, forbidding
(for political reasons) the importation and publication
of the Formula of Concord on penalty of execution and
confiscation of property.He is said to have cast the two
elegantly bound copies of the Formula sent him by his
sister, the wife of Elector August of Saxony, into the fireplace.
Later on, however, the Formula came to be
esteemed also in the Danish Church and to be regarded
as a symbol, at least in fact, if not in form.

While some of the original signatories subsequently
withdrew from the Formula of Concord a larger number
acceded to it. Among the latter were Holstein,
Pomerania, Krain, Kaernthen, Steiermark, etc. In
Sweden the Formula was adopted 1593 by the Council
of Upsala; in Hungary, in 1597.With few exceptions the
Lutheran synods in America and Australia all subscribed
also to the Formula of Concord.

#### 285. Formula Not a New Confession Doctrinally.

The Formula of Concord purified the Lutheran
Church from Romanism, Calvinism, indifferentism,
unionism, synergism, and other errors and unsound
tendencies. It did so, not by proclaiming new exclusive
laws and doctrines, but by showing that these corruptions
were already excluded by the spirit and letter of the
existing Lutheran symbols. Doctrinally the Formula of
Concord is not a new confession, but merely a repetition
and explanation of the old Lutheran confessions. It does
not set forth or formulate a new faith or tenets hitherto
unknown to the Lutheran Church. Nor does it correct,
change, or in any way modify any of her doctrines. On
the contrary its very object was to defend and maintain
the teaching of her old symbols against all manner of
attacks coming from without as well as from within the
Lutheran Church. The Formula merely presents,
repeats, reaffirms explains, defends, clearly defines, and
consistently applies the truths directly or indirectly,
explicitly or implicitly confessed and taught in the
antecedent Lutheran confessions. The Augsburg
Confession concludes its last paragraph: "If there is anything
that any one might desire in this Confession, we
are ready God willing, to present ampler information
(latiorem informationem) according to the Scriptures."
(94, 7.) Close scrutiny will reveal the fact that in every
detail the Formula must be regarded as just such an
"ampler information, according to the Scriptures." The
Lutheran Church, therefore, has always held that whoever
candidly adopts the Augsburg Confession cannot
and will not reject the Formula of Concord either.

As for the Formula itself, it most emphatically disclaims
to be anything really new. In their Preface to the
Book of Concord the Lutheran princes declared: "We
indeed (to repeat in conclusion what we have mentioned
several times above) have wished, in this work of
concord, in no way to devise anything new, or to depart
from the truth of the heavenly doctrine, which our
ancestors (renowned for their piety) as well as we ourselves
have acknowledged and professed.We mean that
doctrine, which, having been derived from the prophetic
and apostolic Scriptures, is contained in the three
ancient Creeds, in the Augsburg Confession, presented in
the year 1530 to Emperor Charles V, of excellent memory,
then in the Apology,which was added to this, in the
Smalcald Articles, and lastly in both the Catechisms of
that excellent man, Dr. Luther. Therefore we also have
determined not to depart even a finger's breadth either
from the subjects themselves, or from the phrases which are
found in them, but, the Spirit of the Lord aiding us, to
persevere constantly, with the greatest harmony, in this
godly agreement, and we intend to examine all controversies
according to this true norm and declaration of
the pure doctrine." (CONC. TRIGL. 23.) In the
Comprehensive Summary we read: "We [the framers
and signers of the Formula of Concord] have declared to
one another with heart and mouth that we will not
make or receive a separate or new confession of our
faith, but confess the public common writings which
always and everywhere were held and used as such symbols
or common confessions in all the churches of the
Augsburg Confession before the dissensions arose among
those who accept the Augsburg Confession, and as long
as in all articles there was on all sides a unanimous
adherence to the pure doctrine of the divine Word, as
the sainted Dr. Luther explained it." (851, 2. 9.) The
Formula of Concord therefore did not wish to offer anything
that was new doctrinally. It merely expressed the
consensus of all loyal Lutherans, and applied the truths
contained in the existing symbols to the questions
raised in the various controversies.

#### 286. Formula a Reaffirmation of Genuine Lutheranism.

To restore Luther's doctrine, such was the declared
purpose of the promoters and authors of the Formula of
Concord. And in deciding the controverted questions,
they certainly did most faithfully adhere to Luther's
teaching. The Formula is an exact, clear, consistent, and
guarded statement of original Lutheranism purified of
all foreign elements later on injected into it by the
Philippists and other errorists. It embodies the old
Lutheran doctrine, as distinguished not merely from
Romanism and Calvinism, but also from
Melanchthonianism and other innovations after the
death of Luther. Surely Luther would not have hesitated
to endorse each and all of its articles or doctrinal statements.
Even Planck, who poured contempt and sarcasm
on the loyal Lutherans, admits: "It was almost
beyond controversy that the Formula, in every controverted
article, established and authorized precisely the
view which was most clearly sanctioned by the
Unaltered Augsburg Confession, by its Apology according
to the edition of the year 1531, by the Smalcald Articles,
and by the Catechisms of Luther." (6, 697.) This complete
agreement with Luther also accounts for the fact
that the Formula was immediately acknowledged by
two-thirds of the Protestants in Germany.

As for Luther, the Formula of Concord regards him
as the God-given Reformer and teacher of the Church.
We read: "By the special grace and mercy of the
Almighty the doctrine concerning the chief articles of
our Christian religion (which under the Papacy had
been horribly obscured by human teachings and ordinances)
were explained and purified again from God's
Word by Dr. Luther, of blessed and holy memory." (847,
1.) Again: "In these last times God, out of special grace
has brought the truth of His Word to light again from
the darkness of the Papacy through the faithful service
of the precious man of God, Dr. Luther." (851, 5.)
Luther is spoken of as "this highly illumined man,""the
hero illumined with unparalleled and most excellent
gifts of the Holy Ghost," "the leading teacher of the
Augsburg Confession." (981, 28; 983, 34.) "Dr. Luther,"
says the Formula, "is to be regarded as the most distinguished
(vornehmste, praecipuus) teacher of the
Churches which confess the Augsburg Confession,whose
entire doctrine as to sum and substance is comprised in
the articles of the Augsburg Confession."(985, 41.) Again:
"Dr.Luther,who,above others, certainly understood the
true and proper meaning of the Augsburg Confession,
and who constantly remained steadfast thereto till his
end, and defended it, shortly before his death repeated
his faith concerning this article [of the Lord's Supper]
with great zeal in his last Confession." (983, 33.)
Accordingly, only from Luther's writings quotations are
introduced by the Formula to prove the truly Lutheran
character of a doctrine. In this respect Luther was considered
the highest authority, outweighing by far that of
Melanchthon or any other Lutheran divine.Everywhere
Luther's books are referred and appealed to, e.g., his
"beautiful and glorious exposition of the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Galatians," his book concerning Councils,
his Large Confession, his De Servo Arbitrio, his
Commentary on Genesis, his sermon of 1533 at Torgau,
etc. (925, 28; 937, 67; 823, 21; 897, 43; 827, 2; 1051, 1; cf.
1213ff.)

Luther's doctrine, according to the Formula of
Concord, is embodied in the old Lutheran symbols, and
was "collected into the articles and chapters of the
Augsburg Confession."(851, 5.) The Augsburg Confession,
the Apology, the Smalcald Articles, and the Small and the
Large Catechism, says the Formula, "have always been
regarded as the norm and model of the doctrine which
Dr. Luther, of blessed memory, has admirably deduced
from God's Word, and firmly established against the
Papacy and other sects; and to his full explanations in
his doctrinal and polemical writings we wish to appeal,
in the manner and as far as Dr. Luther himself in the
Latin preface to his published works has given necessary
and Christian admonition concerning his writings."
(853, 9.) According to the Formula there were no dissensions
among the Lutherans "as long as in all articles
there was on all sides a unanimous adherence to the
pure doctrine of the divine Word as the sainted Dr.
Luther explained it." (851, 2.) Melanchthon, Agricola,
Osiander, Major, and the Philippists, departing from
Luther, struck out on paths of their own, and thus gave
rise to the controversies finally settled by the Formula of
Concord. As for the Formula of Concord itself, the distinct
object also of its promoters and authors was to
restore, reaffirm, and vindicate the doctrine of Luther.
In a letter of July 24, 1576, to Hesshusius and Wigand,
Andreae giving an account of the results of the Torgau
Convention, remarks:"For this I dare affirm and promise
sacredly that the illustrious Elector of Saxony is bent
on this alone that the doctrine of Luther, which has
been partly obscured, partly corrupted, partly condemned
openly or secretly, shall again be restored pure
and unadulterated in the schools and churches, and
accordingly Luther shall live, i.e., Christ, whose faithful
servant Luther was--adeoque Lutherus, hoc est, Christus,
cuius fidelis minister Lutherus fuit, vivat.What more do
you desire? Here [in the Torgau Book] nothing is colored,
nothing is dressed up, nothing is concealed, but
everything is in keeping with the spirit of Luther which
is Christ's. Nihil hic fucatum, nihil palliatum, nihil tectum
est, sed iuxta spiritum Lutheri, qui Christi est."
(Schaff 1, 339.) Also the Formula of Concord, therefore,
contains Luther's theology.

It has been asserted that the Formula of Concord is
a compromise between Luther and Melanchthon, a
"synthesis or combination of the two antagonistic
forces of the Reformation, a balance of mutually
destructive principles," etc. The Formula, says also
Seeberg represents a "Melanchthonian Lutheranism."
But the plain truth is that the Formula is a complete victory
of Luther over the later Melanchthon as well as the
other errorists who had raised their heads within the
Lutheran Church. It gave the floor, not to Philip, but to
Martin.True, it was the avowed object of the Formula to
restore peace to the Lutheran Church, but not by compromising
in any shape or form the doctrine of Luther,
which, its authors were convinced, is nothing but divine
truth itself. In thesis and antithesis, moreover, the
Formula takes a clearly defined stand against all the
errorists of those days: Anabaptists, Schwenckfeldians,
Antitrinitarians, Romanists, Zwinglians, Calvinists,
Crypto-Calvinists, Adiaphorists, Antinomians,
Synergists,Majorists, the later Flacianists, etc. It did not
acknowledge, or leave room for, any doctrines or doctrinal
tendencies deviating in the least from original
genuine Scriptural Lutheranism.At every point it occupied
the old Lutheran ground. Everywhere it observed a
correct balance between two errors (e.g., Romanism
and Zwinglianism, Calvinism and synergism,Majorism
and antinomianism); it steered clear of Scylla as well as
Charybdis avoiding errors to the right as well as pitfalls
to the left. The golden highway of truth on which it travels
was not Melanchthon nor a middle ground between
Luther and Melanchthon, but simply Luther and the
truths which he had brought to light again.

Melanchthonianism may be defined as an effort to
inoculate Lutheranism with a unionistic and Calvinistic
virus. The distinct object of the Formula, however, was
not merely to reduce, but to purge the Lutheran Church
entirely from, this as well as other leaven. The Formula's
theology is not Lutheranism modified by, but thoroughly
cleansed from, antinomianism, Osiandrianism,
and particularly from Philippism.Accordingly, while in
the Formula Luther is celebrated and quoted as the true
and reliable exponent of Lutheranism,Melanchthon is
nowhere appealed to as an authority in this respect. It is
only in the Preface of the Book of Concord that his writings
are referred to as not to be "rejected and condemned",
but the proviso is added, "in as far as
(quatenus) they agree throughout with the norm laid
down in the Book of Concord." (16.)

#### 287. Scripture Sole Standard and Rule.

From the high estimation in which Luther was held
by the Formula of Concord it has falsely been inferred
that this Confession accords Luther the "highest authority"
as Hase says, or considers him "the regulative and
almost infallible expounder" of the Bible, as Schaff
asserts. (Creeds 1, 313.) But according to the Formula
the supreme arbiter and only final rule in all matters of
religion is the inspired Word of God; and absolutely all
human teachers and books, including Luther and the
Lutheran symbols, are subject to its verdict.When, after
Luther's death, God permitted doctrinal controversies
to distract the Church, His purpose, no doubt, being
also to have her fully realize not only that Luther's doctrine
is in complete harmony with Scripture, but, in
addition, that in matters of faith and doctrine not
Luther, not the Church, not the symbols, nor any other
human authority but His Word alone is the sole rule
and norm. The Formula certainly learned this lesson
well. In its opening paragraph we read: "We believe,
teach, and confess that the sole rule and standard
according to which both all doctrines and all teachers
should be estimated and judged are the prophetic and
apostolic Scriptures of the Old and the New Testament
alone ... Other writings, however, of ancient or modern
teachers, whatever name they bear must not be regarded
as equal to the Holy Scriptures, but all of them
together be subjected to them."(777, 1.) And in this, too,
the Formula was conscious of being in agreement with
Luther. Luther himself, it declares,"has expressly drawn
this distinction namely, that the Word of God alone
should be and remain the only standard and rule of
doctrine, to which the writings of no man should be
regarded as equal, but to which everything should be
subjected." (853, 9.) Scripture is, and always must
remain, the only norma normans, the standard that
rules everything,--such was the attitude of the Formula
of Concord.

Accordingly, the proof proper for the truth of any
doctrinal statement is taken by the Formula neither
from the Lutheran symbols nor the writings of Luther,
but from the Word of God.And the only reason why the
promoters and framers of the Formulawere determined
to restore the unadulterated teaching of Luther was
because, in the controversies following his death, they
had thoroughly convinced themselves that, on the one
hand, the doctrines proclaimed by Luther were nothing
but the purest gold mined from the shafts of God's
Word, and that, on the other hand, the various deviations
from Luther's teaching,which had caused the dissensions,
were aberrations not only from the original
Lutheran Confessions, but also from Holy Scripture.
The thirty years of theological discussion had satisfied
the Lutherans that to adhere to the Bible was tantamount
to adhering to the teaching of Luther, and vice
versa. Accordingly, the Formula also declared it as its
object to prove that the doctrines it presented were in
harmony with the Bible, as well as with the teaching of
Luther and the Augsburg Confession. (856, 19.) This
agreement with the Word of God and the preceding
Lutheran symbols constitutes the Formula a Lutheran
confession, which no one who is a true Lutheran can
reject or, for doctrinal reasons, refuse to accept.

#### 288. Formula Benefited Lutheran Church.

It has frequently been asserted that the Formula of
Concord greatly damaged Lutheranism, causing bitter
controversies, and driving many Lutherans into the fold
of Calvinism, e.g., in the Palatinate (1583), in Anhalt, in
Hesse, and in Brandenburg (1613) . Richard says: "The
Formula of Concord was the cause of the most bitter
controversies, dissensions, and alienations. The position
taken by the adherents of the Formula of Concord that
this document is the true historical and logical explanation
of the older confessions and is therefore the test and
touchstone of Lutheranism, had the effect, as one
extreme generates a counter-extreme, of driving many
individual Lutherans and many Lutheran churches into
the Calvinistic fold, as that fold was represented in
Germany by the Heidelberg Catechism as the chief confession
of faith." (516.)

But this entire view is founded on indifferentism
and unionism flowing from the false principle that
quality must be sacrificed to quantity, eternal truth to
temporal peace and unity to external progress and temporary
success.Viewed in the light of God's Word error
is the centrifugal force and the real cause of dissension
and separations among Christians, while divine truth
always acts as a centripetal or a truly unifying power.
The Formula therefore, standing clearly as it does for
divine truth only, cannot be charged with causing dissension
and breeding trouble among Christians. It settled
many controversies and healed dissensions, but
produced none. True, the Formula was condemned by
many, but with no greater justice and for no other reasons
than those for which the truths of God's Word
have always been assailed by their enemies.

Nor is the statement correct that the Formula of
Concord drove loyal Lutherans out of their own churches
into Calvinistic folds. It clearly stated what, according
to God's Word and their old confessions, Lutherans
always will believe, teach, and confess, as also what they
always must reject as false and detrimental to the cause
of the Church of Christ; however, in so doing, it did not
drive Lutherans into the ranks of the Calvinists, but
drove masked Calvinists out of the ranks of loyal
Lutherans into those folds to which they really
belonged. Indeed, the Formula failed to make true
Lutherans of all the errorists; but neither did the
Augsburg Confession succeed in making friends and
Lutherans of all Papists, nor the Bible, in making
Christians of all unbelievers.However, by clearly stating
its position in thesis and antithesis, the Formula did succeed
in bringing about a wholesome separation, ridding
the Lutheran Church of antagonistic spirits, unsound
tendencies, and false doctrines. In fact, it saved the
Church from slow, but sure poisoning at the hands of
the Crypto-Calvinists; it restored purity, unity, morale,
courage, and hope when she was demoralized, distracted,
and disfigured by many dissensions and corruptions.
Whatever,by adopting the Formula ofConcord the
Lutheran Church therefore may have lost in extension,
it won in intention; what it lost in numbers, it won in
unity, solidity, and firmness in the truth.

True, the Formula of Concord completely foiled
Melanchthon's plan of a union between the Lutheran
and Reformed churches on the basis of the Variata of
1540,--a fact which more than anything else roused the
ire of Philippists and Calvinists. But that was an ungodly
union, contrary to the Word of God; a union involving
a denial of essential Christian truths; a union
incompatible with the spirit of Lutheranism, which
cannot survive where faith is gagged and open confession
of the truth is smothered; a union in which
Calvinism, engrafted on Lutheranism, would have
reduced the latter to a mere feeder of a foreign life.
However, though it shattered the ungodly plans of the
Philippists and Calvinists, the Formula did not in the
least destroy the hope of, or block the way for, a truly
Christian agreement. On the contrary, it formulated the
only true basis for such a union, which it also realized
among the Lutherans. And if the Lutheran and
Reformed churches will ever unite in a true and godly
manner it must be done on the basis of the truths set
forth by the Formula.

#### 289.Necessity of Formula of Concord.

Several Lutheran states, as related above declined to
accept the Formula of Concord, giving as their reason for
such action that there was no need of a new confession.
The fact, however, that the Formula was adopted by the
great majority of Lutheran princes, professors, preachers,
and congregations proves conclusively that they
were of a different opinion. A new confession was necessary,
not indeed because new truths had been discovered
which called for confessional coining or formulation,
but because the old doctrines, assailed by errorists,
were in need of vindication, and the Lutheran Church,
distracted by prolonged theological warfare, was sorely
in need of being restored to unity, peace, and stability.
The question-marks suspended everywhere in
Germany after Luther's death were: Is Lutheranism to
die or live? Are its old standards and doctrines to be
scrapped or vindicated? Is the Church of Luther to
remain, or to be transformed into a unionistic or
Reformed body? Is it to retain its unity, or will it become
a house divided against itself and infested with all manner
of sects?

Evidently, then, if the Lutheran Church was not to
go down ingloriously, a new confession was needed
which would not only clear the religious and theological
atmosphere, but restore confidence, hope, and normalcy.
A confession was needed which would bring out
clearly the truths for which Lutherans must firmly stand
if they would be true to God, true to His Word, true to
their Church, true to themselves, and true to their traditions.
A confession was needed which would draw
exactly, clearly, and unmistakably the lines which separate
Lutherans, not only from Romanists, but also from
Zwinglians, Calvinists, Crypto-Calvinists, unionists,
and the advocates of other errors and unsound tendencies.
Being essentially the Church of the pure Word and
Sacrament, the only way for the Lutheran Church to
maintain her identity and independence was to settle
her controversies not by evading or compromising the
doctrinal issues involved, but by honestly facing and
definitely deciding them in accordance with her principles:
the Word of God and the old confessions.
Particularly with respect to the doctrine of the Lord's
Supper, Melanchthon by constantly altering the
Augsburg Confession, had muddied the water to such an
extent that the adoption of the Augustana was no longer
a clear test of Lutheran orthodoxy and loyalty. Even
Calvin, and the German Reformed generally subscribed
to it, "in the sense," they said, "in which Melanchthon
has explained it." The result was a corruption of
Lutheranism and a pernicious Calvinistic propaganda
in Lutheran territories. A new confession was the only
means of ending the confusion and checking the invasion.

#### 290. Formula Fully Met Requirements.

The Formula of Concord was just such a confession
as the situation called for. The Preface to the Apology of
the Book of Concord, signed by Kirchner, Selneccer, and
Chemnitz, remarks that the purpose of the Formula was
"to establish and propagate unity in the Lutheran
churches and schools, and to check the Sacramentarian
leaven and other corruptions and sects." This purpose
was fully attained by the Formula. It maintained and
vindicated the old Lutheran symbols. It cleared our
Church from all manner of foreign spirits which threatened
to transform its very character. It settled the controversies
by rendering a clear and correct decision on
all doctrinal questions involved. It unified our Church
when she was threatened with hopeless division, anarchy,
and utter ruin. It surrounded her with a wall of fire
against all her enemies. It made her a most uncomfortable
place for such opponents of Lutheranism as
Crypto-Calvinists, unionists, etc. It infused her with
confidence, self-consciousness, conviction, a clear
knowledge of her own position over against the errors
of other churches and sects, and last, but not least, with
a most remarkable vitality.Wherever and whenever, in
the course of time, the Formula of Concord was ignored,
despised, or rejected, the Lutheran Church fell an easy
prey to unionism and sectarianism; but wherever and
whenever the Formula was held in high esteem,
Lutheranism flourished and its enemies were confounded.
Says Schaff: "Outside of Germany the
Lutheran Church is stunted in its normal growth, or
undergoes with the change of language and nationality,
an ecclesiastical transformation. This is the case with the
great majority of Anglicized and Americanized
Lutherans, who adopt Reformed views on the
Sacraments, the observance of Sunday, church discipline,
and other points."But the fact is that, since Schaff
wrote the above, the Lutheran Church developed and
flourished nowhere as in America, owing chiefly to the
return of American Lutherans to their confessions,
including the Formula of Concord. The Formula of
Concord fully supplied the dire need created by the controversies
after Luther's death; and, despite many subsequent
controversies, also in America, down to the present
day, no further confessional deliverances have been
necessary, and most likely such will not be needed in the
future either.

#### 291. Formula Attacked and Defended.

Drawing accurately and deeply, as it did, the lines of
demarcation between Lutheranism, on the one hand,
and Calvinism, Philippism, etc., on the other, and thus
also putting an end to the Calvinistic propaganda successfully
carried on for decades within the Lutheran
Church, the Formula of Concord was bound to become
a rock of offense and to meet with opposition on the
part of all enemies of genuine Lutheranism within as
well as without the Lutheran Church. Both Romanists
and Calvinists had long ago accustomed themselves to
viewing the Lutheran Church as moribund and merely
to be preyed upon by others. Accordingly, when, contrary
to all expectations, our Church, united by the
Formula, rose once more to her pristine power and
glory, it roused the envy and inflamed the ire and rage
of her enemies.Numerous protests against the Formula,
emanating chiefly from Reformed and Crypto-
Calvinistic sources, were lodged with Elector August
and other Lutheran princes. Even Queen Elizabeth of
England sent a deputation urging the Elector not to
allow the promulgation of the new confession. John
Casimir of the Palatinate, also at the instigation of the
English queen, endeavored to organize the Reformed in
order to prevent its adoption. Also later on the
Calvinists insisted that a general council (of course, participated
in by Calvinists and Crypto-Calvinists) should
have been held to decide on its formal and final adoption!

Numerous attacks on the Formula of Concord were
published 1578, 1579, 1581, and later, some of them
anonymously. They were directed chiefly against its
doctrine of the real presence in the Lord's Supper, the
majesty of the human nature of Christ, and eternal election,
particularly its refusal to solve, either in a synergistic
or in a Calvinistic manner, the mystery presented to
human reason in the teaching of the Bible that God
alone is the cause of man's salvation,while man alone is
the cause of his damnation. In a letter to Beza,Ursinus,
the chief author of the Heidelberg Catechism, shrewdly
advised the Reformed to continue accepting the
Augsburg Confession, but to agitate against the Formula.
He himself led the Reformed attacks by publishing,
1581, "Admonitio Christiana de Libro Concordiae,
Christian Admonition Concerning the Book of
Concord," also called "Admonitio Neostadiensis,
Neustadt Admonition." Its charges were refuted in the
"Apology or Defense of the Christian Book of
Concord-Apologia oder Verantwortung des christlichen
Konkordienbuchs,in welcher die wahre christliche Lehre,
so im Konkordienbuch verfasst, mit gutem Grunde
heiliger, goettlicher Schrift verteidiget, die Verkehrung
aber und Kalumnien, so von unruhigen Leuten wider
gedachtes christliche Buch ausgesprenget, widerlegt
worden," 1583 (1582). Having been prepared by command
of the Lutheran electors, and composed by
Kirchner, Selneccer, and Chemnitz, and before its publication
also submitted to other theologians for their
approval, this guardedly written Apology, also called the
Erfurt Book, gained considerable authority and influence.

The Preface of this Erfurt Book enumerates, besides
the Christian Admonition of Ursinus and the Neustadt
theologians, the following writings published against
the Formula of Concord: 1. Opinion and Apology
(Bedencken und Apologie) of Some Anhalt Theologians;
2. Defense (Verantwortung) of the Bremen Preachers;
Christian Irenaeus on Original Sin, Nova Novorum
("ein famos Libell"); other libelli, satyrae et pasquilli;
Calumniae et Scurrilia Convitia of Brother Nass (Bruder
Nass); and the history of the Augsburg Confession by
Ambrosius Wolf, in which the author asserts that from
the beginning the doctrine of Zwingli and Calvin predominated
in all Protestant churches. The theologians
of Neustadt, Bremen, and Anhalt replied to the Erfurt
Apology; which, in turn, called forth counter-replies
from the Lutherans. Beza wrote: Refutation of the
Dogma Concerning the Fictitious Omnipresence of the
Flesh of Christ. In 1607 Hospinian published his
"Concordia Discors" to which Hutter replied in his
Concordia Concors.The papal detractors of the Formula
were led by the Jesuit Cardinal Bellarmin, who in 1589
published his Judgment of the Book of Concord.

#### 292.Modern Strictures on Formula of Concord.

Down to the present day the Formula of Concord
has been assailed particularly by unionistic and
Reformed opponents of true Lutheranism. Schaff criticizes:
"Religion was confounded with theology, piety
with orthodoxy, and orthodoxy with an exclusive confessionalism."
(1, 259.) However, the subjects treated in
the Formula are the most vital doctrines of the Christian
religion: concerning sin and grace, the person and work
of Christ, justification and faith, the means of grace,--
truths without which neither Christian theology nor
Christian religion can remain; "Here, then," says
Schmauk, "is the one symbol of the ages which treats
almost exclusively of Christ--of His work, His presence,
His person. Here is the Christ-symbol of the
Lutheran Church. One might almost say that the
Formula of Concord is a developed witness of Luther's
explanation of the Second and Third Articles of the
Apostles' Creed, meeting the modern errors of
Protestantism, those cropping up from the sixteenth to
the twentieth century, in a really modern way." (751.)
Tschackert also designates the assertion that the authors
of the Formula of Concord "abandoned Luther's idea of
faith and established a dead scholasticism" as an unjust
charge. (478.) Indeed, it may be questioned whether the
doctrine of grace, the real heart of Christianity, would
have been saved to the Church without the Formula.

R. Seeberg speaks of the "ossification of Lutheran
theology" caused by the Formula of Concord, and
Tschackert charges it with transforming the Gospel into
a "doctrine." (571.) But what else is the Gospel of Christ
than the divine doctrine or statement and proclamation
of the truth that we are saved, not by our own works,
but by grace and faith alone, for the sake of Christ and
His merits? The Formula of Concord truly says: "The
Gospel is properly a doctrine which teaches what man
should believe, that he may obtain forgiveness of sins
with God, namely, that the Son of God,our Lord Christ,
has taken upon Himself and borne the curse of the Law,
has expiated and paid for all our sins, through whom
alone we again enter into favor with God, obtain forgiveness
of sins by faith, are delivered from death and all
the punishments of sins, and eternally saved." (959, 20.)
Says Schmauk:"The Formula of Concord was ... the very
substance of the Gospel and of the Augsburg Confession,
kneaded through the experience of the first generation
of Protestantism, by incessant and agonizing conflict,
and coming forth from that experience as a true and
tried teaching, a standard recognized by many." (821.)
The Formula of Concord is truly Scriptural, not only
because all its doctrines are derived from the Bible, but
also because the burden of the Scriptures, the doctrine
of justification, is the burden also of all its expositions
the living breath, as it were, pervading all its articles.

Another modern objection to the Formula is that it
binds the future generations to the Book of Concord.
This charge is correct, for the Formula expressly states
that its decisions are to be "a public, definite testimony,
not only for those now living, but also for our posterity,
what is and should remain (sei und bleiben solle-
esseque perpetuo debeat) the unanimous understanding
and judgment of our churches in reference to the articles
in controversy." (857, 16.) However, the criticism
implied in the charge is unwarranted. For the Lutheran
Confessions, as promoters, authors, and signers of the
Formula were fully persuaded, are in perfect agreement
with the eternal and unchangeable Word of God. As to
their contents, therefore, they must always remain the
confession of every Church which really is and would
remain loyal to the Word of God.

#### 293. Formula Unrefuted.

From the day of its birth down to the present time
the Formula of Concord has always been in the limelight
of theological discussion. But what its framers said in
praise of the Augsburg Confession, viz., that, in spite of
numerous enemies, it had remained unrefuted,may be
applied also to the Formula: it stood the test of centuries
and emerged unscathed from the fire of every controversy.
It is true today what Thomasius wrote 1848 with
special reference to the Formula: "Numerous as they
may be who at present revile our Confession, not one
has ever appeared who has refuted its chief propositions
from the Bible." (Bekenntnis der ev.-luth. Kirche, 227.)
Nor can the Formula ever be refuted, for its doctrinal
contents are unadulterated truths of the infallible Word
of God. It confesses the doctrine which Christians
everywhere will finally admit as true and divine indeed,
which they all in their hearts believe even now, if not
explicitly and consciously, at least implicitly and in principle.
The doctrines of the Formula are the ecumenical
truths of Christendom; for true Lutheranism is nothing
but consistent Christianity. The Formula, says Krauth, is
"the completest and clearest confession in which the
Christian Church has ever embodied her faith." Such
being the case, the Formula of Concord must be regarded
also as the key to a godly peace and true unity of
entire Christendom.

The authors of the Formula solemnly declare: "We
entertain heartfelt pleasure and love for, and are on our
part sincerely inclined and anxious to advance with our
utmost power that unity [and peace] by which His
glory remains to God uninjured, nothing of the divine
truth of the Holy Gospel is surrendered, no room is
given to the least error, poor sinners are brought to true,
genuine repentance, raised up by faith, confirmed in
new obedience, and thus justified and eternally saved
alone through the sole merit of Christ."(1095, 95.) Such
was the godly peace and true Christian unity restored by
the Formula of Concord to the Lutheran Church. And
what it did for her it is able also to do for the Church at
large. Being in complete agreement with Scripture, it is
well qualified to become the regeneration center of the
entire present-day corrupted, disrupted, and demoralized
Christendom.

Accordingly Lutherans, the natural advocates of a
truly wholesome and God-pleasing union based on
unity in divine truth, will not only themselves hold fast
what they possess in their glorious Confession, but
strive to impart its blessings also to others, all the while
praying incessantly, fervently, and trustingly with the
pious framers of the Formula: "May Almighty God and
the Father of our Lord Jesus grant the grace of His Holy
Ghost that we all may be one in Him, and constantly
abide in this Christian unity, which is well pleasing to
Him! Amen." (837, 23.)

