---
title: Conclusion To The Apology
weight: 3
type: docs
---

[As regards the slander and complaint of the adversaries at the end
of the _Confutation_, namely, that this doctrine is causing
disobedience and other scandals, this is unjustly imputed to our
doctrine.  For it is evident that by this doctrine the authority of
magistrates is most highly praised.  Moreover, it is well known that
in those localities where this doctrine is preached, the magistrates
have hitherto by the grace of God, been treated with all respect by
the subjects.

But as to the want of unity and dissension in the Church, it is well
known how these matters first happened, and who have caused the
division, namely, the sellers of indulgences, who shamelessly
preached intolerable lies, and afterwards condemned Luther for not
approving of those lies, and besides, they again and again excited
more controversies, so that Luther was induced to attack many other
errors.  But since our opponents would not tolerate the truth, and
dared to promote manifest errors by force, it is easy to judge who is
guilty of the schism.  Surely, all the world, all wisdom, all power
ought to yield to Christ and His holy Word.  But the devil is the
enemy of God, and therefore rouses all his might against Christ, to
extinguish and suppress the Word of God.  Therefore the devil with
his members, setting himself against the Word of God, is the cause of
the schism and want of unity.  For we have most zealously sought
peace, and still most eagerly desire it, provided only we are not
forced to blaspheme and deny Christ.  For God, the discerner of all
men's hearts, is our witness that we do not delight and have no joy
in this awful disunion.  On the other hand, our adversaries have so
far not been willing to conclude peace without stipulating that we
must abandon the saving doctrine of the forgiveness of sin by Christ
without our merit; though Christ would be most foully blasphemed
thereby.

And although, as is the custom of the world it cannot be but that
offenses have occurred in this schism through malice and by imprudent
people; for the devil causes such offenses, to disgrace the Gospel,
yet all this is of no account in view of the great comfort which this
teaching has brought men, that for Christ's sake, without our merit,
we have forgiveness of sins and a gracious God.  Again, that men have
been instructed that forsaking secular estates and magistracies is
not a divine worship, but that such estates and magistracies are
pleasing to God and to be engaged in them is a real holy work and
divine service.

If we also were to narrate the offenses of the adversaries, which,
indeed, we have no desire to do, it would be a terrible list: what an
abominable, blasphemous fair the adversaries have made of the Mass;
what unchaste living has been instituted by their celibacy; how the
Popes have for more than 400 years been engaged in wars against the
emperors, have forgotten the Gospel, and only sought to be emperors
themselves, and to bring all Italy into their power how they have
juggled the possessions of the Church; how through their neglect many
false teachings and forms of worship have been set up by the monks.
Is not their worship of the saints manifest pagan idolatry?  All
their writers do not say one word concerning faith in Christ, by
which forgiveness of sin is obtained; the highest degree of holiness
they ascribe to human traditions, it is chiefly of these that they
write and preach.  Moreover this, too, ought to be numbered with
their offenses, that they clearly reveal what sort of a spirit is in
them, because they are now putting to death so many innocent, pious
people on account of Christian doctrine.  But we do not now wish to
say more concerning this; for these matters should be decided in
accordance with God's Word, regardless of the offenses on either aide.

We hope that all God-fearing men will sufficiently see from this
writing of ours that ours is the Christian doctrine and comforting
and salutary to all godly men.  Accordingly, we pray God to extend
His grace to the end that His holy Gospel may be known and honored by
all, for His glory, and for the peace, unity, and salvation of all of
us.  Regarding all these articles we offer to make further statements
if required.]